A Pianist’s Big Prize: The 8 Best Classical Music Moments of the Week on YouTube
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them on YouTube. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
Igor Levit — who won one of the most prestigious prizes in music this week, the $300,000 Gilmore Artist Award — allows his politics to inform his artistry to an extent that is rare in the classical world. At the first night of the BBC Proms last summer, in a London consumed by Brexit, Mr. Levit made a pointed statement with his encore, Beethoven’s “Ode to Joy,” the anthem of the European Union, a point he underlined with the E.U. pin he wore. But the power of the gesture came from his musicianship — the way his left hand drew out the ominous undertones of Liszt’s transcription, making the familiar, joyful melody seem hard-won when it finally rings out clearly. MICHAEL COOPER
Read our profile of Mr. Levit, and watch a 360-degree video featuring his piano flying above the streets of Berlin.
Read our review of Mr. Levit’s New York recital debut in 2014.
Read our review of “Goldberg,” Mr. Levit’s 2015 collaboration with Marina Abramovic.
Read our review of Mr. Levit’s debut recital at Carnegie Hall last year.
In his first appearance after winning the Gilmore, a celebratory talk and recital at the Greene Space on Thursday night, Igor Levit opened with understated virtuosity: the Chaconne from Bach’s Partita No. 2 for violin, transcribed for the left hand by Brahms. The piece takes place mostly in the piano’s lower range, which is notoriously muddy, but not in Mr. Levit’s hands — er, hand. Many critics have noted his phenomenal precision, and you can hear why in this recording of Frederic Rzewski’s 1975 variations on “The People United Will Never Be Defeated!” In the final movement, the theme returns as hammered chords (marked with accents on top of a forte) played almost entirely on the lower half of the piano. The melody inside those chords couldn’t be clearer. JOSHUA BARONE
Ahead of her performances with the New York Philharmonic this week, the cellist Alisa Weilerstein joined us for a Facebook Live concert and interview. She closed with the two bourrées from Bach’s Suite No. 3 in C, which she has been touring as part of a three-hour marathon of all six of Bach’s cello suites. I asked when we could expect a recording; alas, likely not this year. But this led me back to her other albums, including her impassioned recording of Dvorak’s Cello Concerto with the Czech Philharmonic Orchestra in 2014. Her playing has the expressive power of human voice — especially in the second movement, in which Dvorak borrows the melody from his lied “Lasst mich allein.” The song’s opening line, “Leave me alone in my dreams,” comes through in Ms. Weilerstein’s playing, with the fragile sincerity of a pleading heart. JOSHUA BARONE
Watch Alisa Weilerstein on Facebook Live and read our review of her concert with the Philharmonic.
Electronic works by the composer Natasha Barrett were among the highlights I encountered at a “spatial audio workshop” last summer at Empac, the experimental performance center in Troy, N.Y. Reading an intriguing best-of-2017 list by the music writer Simon Cummings, I was alerted to the existence of a new album focused on some of Ms. Barrett’s early pieces. My current favorite from the batch is “Racing Unseen.” The composition starts out with some harsh and distorted waves of sound, before settling into a lull influenced by ambient textures. This calm is not long-lived, though. Shortly before the two-minute mark, a single thwack — suggestive of steel percussion — heralds a slow turn toward rhythmic chaos. When the composition reaches a feverish peak, Ms. Barrett can be heard toying with the beats in a way that might thrill fans of house music from Chicago’s “footwork” scene. SETH COLTER WALLS
The charismatic tenor Vittorio Grigolo, who never holds back, is a hotheaded and heroic Cavaradossi in the Metropolitan Opera’s new production of Puccini’s “Tosca.” Mr. Grigolo’s fans, who love his burnished sound and unbridled passion, are sure to be thrilled. Yet other opera buffs can’t get past some rawness in his voice. That downside matters more when he takes on classic bel canto roles, like Nemorino in Donizetti’s “L’Elisir d’Amore,” which he sang at the Met in 2016. Here he is in the aria “Una furtiva lagrima.” He does have a penchant for scooping (that is, sliding) up to higher notes rather than executing them cleanly. (Listen to the second phrase.) Still, if you can accept this as a characteristic of Mr. Grigolo’s dramatic approach and not as a vocal mannerism, rewards come with the ardency and sheen of his singing. When he exclaims “M’ama” (“She loves me”), about the woman he loves from afar, Mr. Grigolo sounds overcome with fervor and hope. Of course she loves him. How could she not? ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Read our review of the new “Tosca.”
Sergei Prokofiev, an adherent of Christian Science, was not especially known for settings of music of the Russian Orthodox Church, so he seemed the odd man out amid the likes of Kastalsky, Chesnokov and Rachmaninoff in a New Year’s program by the PaTRAM Institute Singers and the Clarion Choir. At the end of the PaTRAM half of the program came “Many Years,” Prokofiev’s arrangement of a centuries-old refrain for the coronation scene in Eisenstein’s 1944 film “Ivan the Terrible.” Here the festival choir of the Summer School of Liturgical Music at Holy Trinity Monastery in Jordanville, N.Y., sings it, after a minute of rising chant — a signature of the style — sung by a basso profundo acting as deacon: “Grant, O Lord, a prosperous and peaceful life.” JAMES R. OESTREICH
In a 1910 letter to the composer Edgar Varèse, Debussy complained of feeling betrayed by “so-called” pianists. “I can’t tell you the extent to which my piano music has been deformed,” he wrote. This year, the centennial of Debussy’s death, will offer many opportunities to hear his music, including the piano works. What bothered him about the way many pianists played his music, I think, is that they took the “Impressionist” label (and Debussy disliked that word) as an invitation for excessively loose rhythm and overly blurry textures. We have a few precious examples of Debussy at the piano. In 1904 he recorded a few short songs and a brief excerpt from “Pelléas et Mélisande” with Mary Garden, the soprano Debussy chose to create the role of Mélisande in 1902. Here they are in the fifth song (“Green”) from his cycle “Ariettes Oubliées.” You have to listen closely and disregard the surface noise. Debussy plays the lilting opening lightly and crisply. When splashes of watery arpeggios break out, the sound is milky but also wonderfully scintillating. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Tenet ushered out the Christmas season on Wednesday with Vespers music of the 17th-century German master Michael Praetorius, who has always struck me as the proprietor of the holiday candy store. His sweets include multiple settings of the hymn “Puer Natus in Bethlehem” (“A Boy Is Born in Bethlehem”), sung by Tenet this week in a version different from the more elaborate one it sings here, in a 2013 performance in San Diego with the Dark Horse Consort and the Bach Collegium San Diego. JAMES R. OESTREICH
