Pop, Rock and Jazz in NYC This Week
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz. 
CRACKER AND CAMPER VAN BEETHOVEN at Highline Ballroom (Jan. 14, 8 p.m.). Those who were young during Bill Clinton’s first term as president may know David Lowery as the wry alt-rocker who sang Cracker’s trippy 1993 hit “Low.” Those who are about a decade older likely think of Mr. Lowery instead as the wry college-rock guy who sang Camper Van Beethoven’s surreal 1985 song “Take the Skinheads Bowling.” Fans of all ages can enjoy this show, where Mr. Lowery will front both bands on a double bill.212-414-5994, highlineballroom.com
ANDERSON EAST at Music Hall of Williamsburg (Jan. 12, 9 p.m.). A Nashville journeyman with a taste for classic 1960s soul, Anderson East takes his deepest swig yet of that genre with his new album, “Encore.” Blink and you might think you’re listening to an above-average Otis Redding impersonator, or Joe Cocker’s long-lost nephew. Mr. East will celebrate the album’s release on Friday evening with this Brooklyn show.888-929-7849, musichallofwilliamsburg.com
HAMILTON LEITHAUSER at Café Carlyle (Jan. 16-20 and 23-27, 8:45 p.m.). As the lead singer of the 2000s indie-rock band the Walkmen, Hamilton Leithauser perfected an instantly identifiable vocal style — gruff, romantic, a little desperate, a little louche. Mr. Leithauser has continued to explore these moods since that group went on hiatus in 2012, most recently via a fetching duet with Angel Olsen. His latest venture is this 10-show solo residency at the upscale Upper East Side supper club Café Carlyle.866-468-3399, hleithauser.tumblr.com
PASSION PIT at Terminal 5 (Jan. 13, 8:30 p.m.). Songs like “Sleepyhead” (from 2008) and “Take a Walk” (from 2012) established Passion Pit’s Michael Angelakos as a synth-pop auteur of note. More recently, in 2017, Mr. Angelakos founded a company that provides mental health and legal services to artists — and self-released an album, “Tremendous Sea of Love,” to warm reviews. (Tickets for this midtown Manhattan performance are sold out, but the resale market is well-stocked.)888-929-7849, terminal5nyc.com
THE SHONDES at the Silent Barn (Jan. 12, 8 p.m.). Loud, outspoken and as passionate about the radical possibilities of romance as it is about radical politics, this Brooklyn-based group is well suited to cut through the nihilistic noise of 2018. This Friday night show at Bushwick’s Silent Barn, coming more than a year after the band’s most recent album, “Brighton,” is a welcome chance to hear what the Shondes have been up to lately. With Perennial and Alecks.silentbarn.org
WAX IDOLS at Elsewhere (Jan. 12, 6 p.m.). This group’s most recent album, “American Tragic,” from 2015, is a minor masterpiece of darkly glamorous goth-pop. If you didn’t hear it then, it’s not too late to discover its delights now — and you’ll be ahead of the game when Wax Idols’ follow-up, “Happy Ending,” which the band’s charismatic singer-songwriter, Hether Fortune, has described as a macabre concept LP, arrives later this year. In the meantime, this show at the multilevel Brooklyn event space Elsewhere is a good choice for anyone seeking wintry thrills. With Future Punx and Desert Sharks.elsewherebrooklyn.com
YAMS DAY at New York Expo Center (Jan. 18, 8 p.m.). Three years after the death at 26 of the estimable hip-hop tastemaker and impresario Steven Rodriguez, known to the world as ASAP Yams, the circle of uptown New York rappers that orbited him — collectively dubbed ASAP Mob — remains a hub of exciting new ideas and throwback joys. The group will celebrate Mr. Rodriguez’s memory on Saturday with the third annual Yams Day concert, held this year at a cavernous convention center in the Bronx, with a portion of proceeds going to the Always Strive and Prosper Foundation, a substance-abuse education organization founded by Yams’s mother. Expect dynamic performances from the crew’s torchbearers, ASAP Rocky and ASAP Ferg, as well as some high-profile friends: Lil Yachty and Nav are among the confirmed guests.888-929-7849, asapmob.com
SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON
HARRIS EISENSTADT’S ‘POSCHIAVO 50’ AND PLAY at the Owl (Jan. 18, 7:30 p.m.). Mr. Eisenstadt, a drummer, is also possessed of a cinematic compositional voice. He wrote 50 short pieces during a residency at the Uncool Festival in Switzerland last year, and he’s been gradually unveiling them at the Owl, playing one show per month since November. For each concert he’s enlisted one or two different collaborators; at this one he’ll be joined by two fellow percussionists: Patricia Brennan on vibraphone and Chris Dingman on marimba. Also on the bill is Play, a trio led by the drummer Vinnie Sperrazza and featuring the pianist Jacob Sacks and the bassist Masa Kamaguchi. Play investigates the repertoires of mid-20th-century composers, usually in a briskly swinging style.718-774-0042, theowl.nyc
BILLY HARPER QUINTET at Smoke (Jan. 12-14; 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Harper was of the most consistently exciting tenor saxophonists to emerge in the late 1960s and early ’70s. He seemed to wield his horn like hot iron; his book of compositions, meanwhile, read as an insurrectionary tract, while fusing concepts from John Coltrane and Joe Henderson. His powers are undiminished, though we haven’t seen a leadership recording from him in roughly a decade, and he does not headline his own shows in New York often enough. Catch him here with Freddie Hendrix on trumpet, Francesca Tanksley on piano, Hwansu Kang on bass and Aaron Scott on drums.212-864-6662, smokejazz.com
TOM HARRELL at the Village Vanguard (through Jan. 21, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Harrell boasts a smoky surety on both trumpet and flugelhorn; at 71, he’s making some of the best music of his career, employing his bop-Romantic sensibility in midsize ensembles that feature some fabulous supporting actors. Through Sunday, he performs with Danny Grissett on piano, Ugonna Okegwo on bass and Adam Cruz on drums. After a break on Monday, the band plays six more nights with Jaleel Shaw joining on alto saxophone, and the drummer Joe Dyson subbing for Mr. Cruz. 212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com
KEYON HARROLD AND FRIENDS at the Blue Note (Jan. 15-18, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). In the fall Mr. Harrold released a bold, expansive album, “The Mugician.” It finds his trumpet coaxing an electrified ensemble into all sorts of approaches — slow-jam, vague Caribbean groove, contemporary jazz balladry — then tearing into them with animated, inventive soloing. He will draw on that material here, likely with special guests. (The album features a long list of guest vocalists, and when he played the Blue Note last January, Mr. Harrold brought along the rapper Big K.R.I.T. and the vocalist Bilal.)212-475-8592, bluenote.net
ANNA WEBBER at the Jazz Gallery (Jan. 18, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). The compositions of Ms. Webber, a saxophonist and multi-reedist, play in fresh ways with chime and repetition and schematics. The synced-up interactions she has with her band don’t feel clinical or bolted down; they’re open and resonant and exposed to the wind. Here she leads a remarkable septet, featuring Jeremy Viner on tenor saxophone and clarinet, Jacob Garchik on trombone, Chris Hoffman on cello, Matt Mitchell on piano, Chris Tordini on bass and Ches Smith on drums and vibraphone.646-494-3625, jazzgallery.nyc
WINTER JAZZFEST (through Jan. 17). Temperatures should be unseasonably high this weekend — good news for the Winter Jazzfest Marathon, taking place Friday and Saturday at clubs and theaters across Lower Manhattan. Corralling over 100 sets of boldly programmed music, it’s your opportunity to catch a gust of the trade winds sweeping across contemporary jazz. Acts include the Comet Is Coming, from London; the flutist Nicole Mitchell, this year’s featured festival artist; and the upstart Onyx Collective. The rest of the festival consists of nightly shows at venues around Manhattan, Sunday through Wednesday, all of them worth considering.winterjazzfest.com
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO
