Classical Music in NYC This Week
Our guide to the city’s best classical music and opera. 
BUDAPEST FESTIVAL ORCHESTRA at David Geffen Hall (Jan. 14, 3 p.m.). Ivan Fischer and his incomparable Hungarian forces are the first visitors in a strong week of touring orchestras passing through New York, and they are surely one of the finest and most consistently interesting teams operating today. The main event is Rachmaninoff’s lyrical Symphony No. 2, accompanied by Bach’s Orchestral Suite No. 2, and Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No. 3. Denes Varjon is the soloist.212-721-6500, lincolncenter.org
DAVID BRIGGS at the Cathedral of Saint John the Divine (Jan. 16, 7:30 p.m.). Currently an artist in residence at this Morningside Heights cathedral, Mr. Briggs is one of our finest organists, and also a particularly good transcriber of orchestral works for his own instrument. Hear that to good effect in this concert, where he plays Mahler’s Symphony No. 5.212-316-7540, stjohndivine.org
‘L’ELISIR D’AMORE’ at the Metropolitan Opera (Jan. 16, 7:30 p.m., through Feb. 17). Donizetti’s classic comedy returns in the Bartlett Sher production, and with three strong leads: Matthew Polenzani as Nemorino, Pretty Yende as Adina, and Ildebrando d’Arcangelo as Dulcamara. Domingo Hindoyan, a product of El Sistema and the husband of the Met’s current Tosca, Sonya Yoncheva, makes his house debut on the podium.212-362-6000, metopera.org
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC at David Geffen Hall (Jan. 17, 7:30 p.m., through Jan. 20). Joshua Weilerstein, formerly a Philharmonic assistant conductor, returns to the podium as a replacement for the disgraced Charles Dutoit, and leads an all-Ravel program. Inevitably it ends with the “Boléro,” but on the way there is “Le Tombeau de Couperin” and the “Valses nobles et sentimentales,” as well as the Piano Concerto for the Left Hand, played by Jean-Yves Thibaudet.212-875-5656, nyphil.org
ROYAL CONCERTGEBOUW ORCHESTRA at Carnegie Hall (Jan. 17-18, 8 p.m.). Daniele Gatti’s appointment as the chief conductor of the Netherlands’ foremost orchestra has made a great deal of sense: he and his players share a specialty in music from the Wagner-to-Mahler period. That’s the focus here. On Wednesday, a typical Gatti program: the third-act prelude and “Good Friday Music” from Wagner’s “Parsifal” prefaces Bruckner’s Symphony No. 9. On Thursday, there’s Mahler’s Symphony No. 1, and the soloist Janine Jansen, a Perspectives artist this season, joins in for Bruch’s Violin Concerto No. 1.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
TALEA ENSEMBLE at Flea Theater (Jan. 18, 7 p.m.). A clever program from a clever ensemble, one made up of homages by composers contemporary to composers past. Hear Pauline Oliveros’ “Quintuplets Play Pen: Homage to Ruth Crawford,” James Weeks’ “Honey Celebration” (a nod to Schubert), Oliver Knussen’s “upon one note” (looking to Purcell), and Kurtag’s “Hommage à R. Sch.”866-811-4111, theflea.org
