Classical Music in NYC This Week
Our guide to the city’s best classical music and opera.
CLEVELAND ORCHESTRA at Carnegie Hall (Jan. 23-24, 8 p.m.). Whether you think this is the best orchestra in the country, like my colleague Zachary Woolfe, or simply very, very good indeed, any visit from this storied old band to New York is worth checking out. On Tuesday, Franz Welser-Möst leads the local premiere of “Stromab” by Johannes Maria Staud, a favorite composer of the conductor’s, as well as Mahler’s Symphony No. 9. On Wednesday, an all-too-rare performance of a Haydn oratorio, “The Seasons.” Golda Schultz, Maximilian Schmitt and Christian Van Horn are the soloists, joined by the Cleveland Orchestra Chorus.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
ERIC HUEBNER AND STEVEN BECK at Miller Theater (Jan. 23, 6 p.m.). The first of this winter’s pop-up concerts in Morningside Heights, where the audience sits on the stage and has easy access to beer, is a double-piano feast: Ligeti’s “Three Pieces for Two Pianos,” Steve Reich’s “Piano Phase” and, dauntingly, Pierre Boulez’s “Structures I.”212-854-7799, millertheatre.com
FOCUS! FESTIVAL at Peter Jay Sharp Theater (Jan. 19, 7:30 p.m.). For this year’s Juilliard festival, director Joel Sachs has chosen to showcase composers living and working in China, with one honorable exception. This first of six free programs, which conclude on Jan. 26 with the Juilliard Orchestra proper, sees the New Juilliard Ensemble play two world premieres, from Wang Shuci and Liu Sola, plus music by Ye Xiaogang and that one interloper, Chou Wen-Chung, a student of Martinu’s and Varèse’s who has lived for decades in New York.212-799-5000, juilliard.edu
JANINE JANSEN, JEAN-YVES THIBAUDET, DOVER QUARTET at Carnegie Hall (Jan. 21, 2 p.m.). Chamber music is a real focus of the violinist Janine Jansen’s Perspectives series this season, and this one is particularly welcome for the presence of a superb young string quartet. Ms. Jansen and Mr. Thibaudet play violin sonatas by Grieg and Debussy, and are joined by the Dovers for Chausson’s Concert for Violin, Piano and String Quartet, a piece written for the great virtuoso Eugène Ysaÿe.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
JONAS KAUFMANN at Carnegie Hall (Jan. 20, 8 p.m.). The superstar tenor may have pulled out of the “Tosca” currently running at the Metropolitan Opera, but there is the consolation prize of this recital, with the superb accompanist Helmut Deutsch. I suspect there will be encores, but the sole work scheduled is Schubert’s “Die schöne Müllerin.” Pray for returns.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
JULIUS EASTMAN at The Kitchen (Jan. 25, 8 p.m.). Any retrospective for this composer, who died in 1990 but whose music is having a renaissance, is a welcome one. A thoughtfully constructed project at this Chelsea space, complete with an exhibition of archival material, is particularly so. On this program, two works from 1974, “Joy Boy” and “Femenine,” both played by a group that Eastman had a close relationship with, the S.E.M. Ensemble, under the direction of Petr Kotik. Other events run through Feb. 10.212-255-5793, thekitchen.org
‘IL TROVATORE’ at the Metropolitan Opera (Jan. 22, 7:30 p.m., through Feb. 15). Another week, another David McVicar production in the Italian repertoire. Marco Armiliato leads a cast including Jennifer Rowley as Leonora, Anita Rachvelishvili as Azucena, and Yonghoon Lee as Manrico.212-362-6000, metopera.org
