Pop, Rock and Jazz in NYC This Week
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz.
FETTY WAP at Irving Plaza (Jan. 21, 7 p.m.). Three years ago, Fetty Wap was on top of the world. The Paterson, N.J., rapper and singer scored a remarkable three Billboard Top 10 hits in 2015 — “Trap Queen,” “My Way” and “679,” each an exuberant blossom of melody, with echoes that continue to resonate in other popular artists’ music. While Fetty Wap himself has yet to release a second album, this could be the year for a comeback.212-777-6817, irvingplaza.com
GLEN HANSARD at Town Hall (Jan. 19 at 8 p.m.) and Brooklyn Steel (Jan. 21 at 8 p.m.). There’s a memorable sequence in the 2007 film “Once” that shows the singer-songwriter and actor Glen Hansard, in the role of an unknown Irish busker, leading a newly formed band through its first recording session. No one is sure it’s going to work, until, suddenly, it does. Press materials for “Between Two Shores,” Mr. Hansard’s latest solo release, suggest a similar story of unexpected grace, with a sweet, soulful album emerging from a series of informal studio hangs. While these performances are sold out, resale options abound. bowerypresents.com
MAJID JORDAN at Brooklyn Steel (Jan. 22, 8 p.m.). This pair of Canadian R&B craftsmen co-wrote Drake’s 2013 hit “Hold On, We’re Going Home,” thereby ensuring that you likely know the contours of their sound whether you realize it or not. In October, Majid Jordan released a well-received new album, “The Space Between,” full of songs that float as pleasantly as perfume in a very fancy nightclub. After a sold-out Terminal 5 show on Saturday, the duo will cross the East River for this Monday night performance.bowerypresents.com/brooklyn-steel
ROYAL TRUX at Market Hotel (Jan. 19-20, 9 p.m.). For some, Royal Trux’s dark, tempestuous noise defined the sound of alternative rock in the 1990s — which isn’t to suggest that the albums “Cats and Dogs” (from 1993) or “Thank You” (from 1995) sound any less exciting here in the late 2010s. The group’s principals, Neil Hagerty and Jennifer Herrema, reached a détente in 2015 after a breakup that lasted about 15 years, and these weekend shows at the D.I.Y. Brooklyn rock club Market Hotel are the latest stops on their ongoing reunion tour.877-987-6487, ticketfly.com
TAKE ME TO THE RIVER at the New School’s Tishman Auditorium (Jan. 23, 7 p.m.). The 2014 documentary “Take Me to the River” won warm reviews and festival plaudits for its portrayal of the Memphis music scene. Two of the distinguished soul singers featured in the film, William Bell and Bobby Rush, will perform selections from the Stax Records catalog and more at this event, along with student musicians from the New School (which is hosting the show) and the Bronx-based Renaissance Youth Center. Proceeds will benefit the Take Me To The River Education Initiative’s music programs.tmttrgrammy.eventbrite.com
CHESTER WATSON at Trans-Pecos (Jan. 23, 8 p.m.). A Florida-raised rapper and producer in his early 20s, given to mystical loops and deftly interlaced syllables, Chester Watson is a cult artist who seems bound for bigger things. Listen to his 2016 release, “Past Cloaks,” for a primer if you’re among the uninitiated, then see Mr. Watson at this Ridgewood, Queens, space while you still can.877-987-6487, thetranspecos.com
YUMI ZOUMA at Baby’s All Right (Jan. 19-20, 8 p.m.). The melodies on “Willowbank,” the album this New Zealand synth-pop band released in October, are as cozy and welcoming as a well-built pillow fort. The group also put out a limited-edition cover of Oasis’ attitudinous 1995 album “What’s the Story (Morning Glory)” last year, as if to demonstrate its range. Sink into the plush tones at these Brooklyn shows.877-987-6487, babysallright.com
SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON
RAY ANGRY, WARREN WOLF AND FRIENDS at Blue Note (Jan. 22-24, 8 & 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Angry, a powerful pianist, tends toward soul-influenced, sparkling forms of contemporary jazz; Mr. Wolf hews more closely to a straight-ahead style. Together for three nights at the Blue Note, they will convene a rotating cast of all-star collaborators. The band will be different every evening; some of the big names on deck include the trumpeter Sean Jones, the saxophonists Tia Fuller and James Carter, and the drummer Marcus Gilmore.212-475-8592, bluenote.net
AL FOSTER QUARTET at Smoke (Jan. 19-21; 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Foster, a drummer, spent a long tenure accompanying Miles Davis in the 1970s and ’80s, playing on fusion albums such as “Pangaea” and “We Want Miles.” Since then he has been more affiliated with postbop, typically lending his pert and propulsive flair to acoustic jazz combos (with some notable exceptions). Here he celebrates his 75th birthday with a three-night run featuring Dayna Stephens on tenor saxophone, Adam Birnbaum on piano and Doug Weiss on bass.212-864-6662, smokejazz.com
JAMIE SAFT at the Owl (Jan. 25, 8 p.m.). Mr. Saft, a pianist, has played psychedelic Brazilian dub with his New Zion Trio and dark, foreboding ballads with Iggy Pop (on last year’s “Loneliness Road”). Here he celebrates the release of something a little gentler and more straightforward: a solo piano album, “Solo a Genova,” featuring covers of songs by the likes of Curtis Mayfield, Joni Mitchell and John Coltrane, in a personal patois that wanders from languid to joyful.718-774-0042, theowl.nyc
JAZZ LEGENDS FOR DISABILITY PRIDE AT THE SHEEN CENTER (Jan. 25, 7:30 p.m.). This annual benefit for Disability Pride NYC features an impressive lineup of elders and luminaries, including the saxophonist George Coleman, the pianist Kenny Barron, the drummer Jimmy Cobb and the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis. The organization, which also organizes the annual Disability Pride Parade, was founded by Mike LeDonne, a pianist whose daughter, Mary, is disabled due to Praeder-Willi Syndrome.
212-925-2812, disabilitypridenyc.org
JENNY SCHEINMAN’S MISCHIEF AND MAYHEM at Jazz Standard (through Jan. 21, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Ms. Scheinman takes the violin into jazz, Appalachian folk, experimental rock and many zones between. This weekend at the Jazz Standard she presents Mischief and Mayhem, a quartet that makes experimental music of textural enigma, white-knuckle throb and, occasionally, moments of startling melodic clarity. The expert group features Nels Cline on guitar, Todd Sickafoose on bass and Jim Black on drums.212-576-2232, jazzstandard.com
JEN SHYU at the Jazz Gallery (Jan. 24, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Ms. Shyu, a multi-instrumentalist and vocalist and movement artist, recently released “Song of Silver Geese,” a nine-part suite that she calls a “ritual music drama,” sung in a variety of Asian and European languages. Here she performs “Nine Doors,” a related solo piece, at 7:30, and then at 9:30 she follows that with “Song of Silver Geese,” featuring Mat Maneri on viola and Dan Weiss on drums.646-494-3625, jazzgallery.nyc
STEPHANE WREMBEL at Joe’s Pub (Jan. 23, 7 p.m.). Perhaps the most creative improviser in Gypsy jazz today, Mr. Wrembel plays the guitar with a rich and colorful lyricism. He’s best known for writing the music to Woody Allen’s film “Midnight in Paris.” At this show, taking place on Django Reinhardt’s 108th birthday, he celebrates the release of “The Django Experiment III,” an album paying tribute to the famed Gypsy jazz pioneer.212-967-7555, publictheater.org
ZS, OLIVER LAKE AND MORE at H0L0 (Jan. 25, 8 p.m.). Pouring together no-wave, free jazz and electronic incitement, Zs might be improvised music’s ultimate 21st-century cult group. The band, which has gone through a number of lineup changes, currently features Sam Hillmer on tenor saxophone; Patrick Higgins on electric guitar and electronics; Greg Fox on drums and percussion; and Michael Beharie on electronics. Zs celebrate their 15th anniversary with this show, at a basement space in Ridgewood, Queens. The night will see appearances from a range of other performers, including the master alto saxophonist Oliver Lake and the young cellist Leila Bordreuil.h0l0.nyc
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO
