A New Gay Opera: The 8 Best Classical Music Moments of the Week on YouTube
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them on YouTube. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
The first sex scene in Gregory Spears and Greg Pierce’s opera “Fellow Travelers,” which had its New York premiere last weekend, begins with vacation plans. “I should take you to Bermuda,” Hawk, a State Department employee in Washington, D.C., says to Tim, an idealistic newcomer from New York. As the men slowly remove their clothes, Hawk (the baritone Joseph Lattanzi) describes tree groves and “sand as white as milk” and repeatedly tells Tim (the tenor Aaron Blake) “I’ll show you.” Once they are finally in bed together, the music swells as they sing “Bermuda!” The music here is beautiful, if a bit wistful. This is a gay romance in the time of McCarthy and the “lavender scare,” and they know that their paradise is “as far away as it sounds.” JOSHUA BARONE
Read our review of “Fellow Travelers.”
In his personal, boldly quirky score for “Fellow Travelers,” Gregory Spears combines two seemingly disparate musical styles: American Minimalism and the courtly melismatic singing of medieval troubadours. His fascination with early music permeates an earlier work, his strangely mystical Requiem. Composed in 2010, it’s written for six solo voice and an unusual complement of old and new instruments: pedal harp, medieval troubadour harp, recorder, viola, chimes and electric organ. In some sections, like the eclectic opening of the Requiem Aeternam, you also hear echoes of Minimalism, especially the insistent riffs in the harps, which soon provoke the voices into agitated sputtering. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
On the closing night of this year’s Winter Jazzfest, I caught Maroon Cloud, a group led by the veteran flutist and composer Nicole Mitchell. (She will also have a recent chamber piece presented by the International Contemporary Ensemble this Sunday.) The concert served as yet more confirmation of the cellist Tomeka Reid’s exciting adaptability. Occasionally Ms. Reid spun graceful lines underneath some of the vocalist Fay Victor’s potent improvisations. Later, Ms. Reid offered more harshly striated textures during sections led by the pianist Aruan Ortiz. Early in “Leaving Livorno” — a track from the collaborative string trio Hear in Now, which counts her as a member — it’s the cello that announces a steady, repeating motif. Even when Ms. Reid takes leave of the melodic cell for a contemplative solo, a memory of the earlier groove inhabits her sound. SETH COLTER WALLS
“Stromab” (“Downstream”) — a new piece by the Austrian composer Johannes Maria Staud, which the Cleveland Orchestra performed recently at its home in Severance Hall and will repeat on Tuesday at Carnegie Hall — takes inspiration from a horror story, “The Willows,” by Algernon Blackwood. The tale tells of two youths canoeing down the Danube, increasingly overtaken by an ominous, eerie atmosphere and what Mr. Staud calls “a strangely circling sound.” Although he insists that he is not writing program music, an uncanny depiction of lapping, eddying water comes to the fore midway through the piece. François-Xavier Roth conducts the Vienna Symphony in this performance from October. JAMES R. OESTREICH
Concerto Köln’s intermissionless Vivaldi concert at Alice Tully Hall next Wednesday could go by very quickly. If you search out the first movement of “Summer” from its Berlin Classics live version of “The Four Seasons” (with its concertmaster, Shunske Sato, as soloist), you may well find the Allegro non molto tempo too fast at times, however colorfully characterized and undeniably exciting. But it would be hard to argue that the hailstorm of this finale is not Presto — indeed, Presto impetuoso, as it is typically rendered — especially when Mr. Sato tears into his solos. Don’t blink. JAMES R. OESTREICH
François-Xavier Roth was back on the podium at the Boston Symphony Orchestra last week, with a program that was practically experimental in these parts: Stravinsky’s “Firebird”; Bartok’s Piano Concerto No. 1, feistily played by Pierre-Laurent Aimard; and, would you believe, Webern. Well, Webern of a sort, at least: his early “Passacaglia,” his first published work and the first piece he finished after concluding lessons with Schoenberg. Mr. Roth took the decadent route through this latest of late Romanticism, with glamour in the sound and a certain pathos throughout. For an alternative, here is Claudio Abbado’s recording with the Vienna Philharmonic, which always sounds to me as if it’s being torn apart at the bar lines. DAVID ALLEN
It seems the star tenor Jonas Kaufmann will actually, finally show up in New York and perform: Having last appeared at the Metropolitan Opera four years ago, on Saturday he will sing Schubert’s song cycle “Die Schöne Müllerin” with the pianist Helmut Deutsch at Carnegie Hall. Mr. Kaufmann sings German lieder elegantly, while still bringing burnished, heroic colorings to his sound. Yet in Siegmund’s melting “Winterstürme” from Wagner’s “Die Walküre,” he does sort of the opposite, singing the opening phrases like a Schubert lied, with lyrical grace and mellow sound. Even when the music shifts mood as Siegmund is overcome with longing, Mr. Kaufmann eases gently up to the ardent high notes. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Music is impossible to escape at Walt Disney World. Hidden speakers abound, providing a constant soundtrack that changes throughout the parks. Each country in the World Showcase at Epcot gets its own musical shorthand. Germany’s, at least while I was there this week, was a muzak version of the Serenade from Schubert’s song cycle “Schwanengesang.” It was an odd fit for the batch of medieval buildings that represent the country, though perhaps Schubert is easier to swallow than muzak “Meistersinger.” The Serenade lingered in the background but was impossible to ignore whenever the music was at its most sadly beautiful. You can hear one of those moments in this recording, when Ian Bostridge, accompanied by Antonio Pappano, sings, “Des Verräters feindlich Lauschen/Fürchte, Holde, nicht.” JOSHUA BARONE
