Cleveland Conquers: The 8 Best Classical Music Moments of the Week on YouTube
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them on YouTube. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
We can take for granted the transparency, the commitment, the outright brilliance of the Cleveland Orchestra. What has never been quite so assured, however, is Franz Welser-Möst’s stature as an interpreter. The orchestra’s performance of Mahler’s Ninth Symphony on Tuesday at Carnegie Hall, then, was a real, welcome shock. To my ears, this Ninth was bold, brave, even radical. There was barely a hint of the regret, nostalgia and wallowing that has become the norm, as with Bernstein. Instead, at ferocious speeds and with dauntless control, there was anger, brutality and violence, on the way to an almost lonely, unwelcome death. No fond farewell, this: Mr. Welser-Möst looked physically and emotionally drained by the end. DAVID ALLEN
Read “At 100, the Cleveland Orchestra May (Quietly) Be America’s Best.”
Read our 2015 profile of an orchestra that “has a plausible claim to being the best in America.”
The South African soprano Golda Schultz, new to me, was a consistent joy in the Cleveland Orchestra’s recent presentation of Haydn’s oratorio “The Seasons.” At least, that is, in the parts of it that I saw and heard, first in a truncated performance in Cleveland last week (when the two male soloists fell ill and dropped out), then in a partial rehearsal at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday. Ms. Schultz, a favorite of Mr. Welser-Möst, sang with clear, pure tone and conveyed a sparkling personality, with a ready sense of humor, traits also evident in the opening scene of a 2016 performance of Mozart’s “Le Nozze di Figaro” at the Teatro alla Scala in Milan with the baritone Markus Werba, also conducted by Mr. Welser-Möst. JAMES R. OESTREICH
Read our review of Ms. Schultz at the Metropolitan Opera, “her voice buoyant yet substantial, creamy but never heavy.”
I join my colleagues in having been deeply impressed by the Clevelanders’ Mahler, particularly the inner movements, which tingled with tension between rough-hewn aggression and Viennese elegance. I wish David and Jim could have been there on Wednesday for “The Seasons,” its silky warmth a contrast with the previous evening’s discomfiting intensity. The dancing exuberance of Fall was especially impressive; the Cleveland Orchestra Chorus — all-amateur! — sang with both airiness and pungency throughout. Tenor and baritone showed up, finally, but sounded not altogether recovered; Ms. Schultz was as sparkling as Jim’s evaluation attests. God knows it takes no great push to get me to listen to the great Gundula Janowitz, her soprano more mature in flavor than Ms. Schultz’s, but still fresh and joyful, in this aria from Summer, including a delicious low note that speaks to the vigorous pleasures of that season. ZACHARY WOOLFE
If Mr. Welser-Möst’s Mahler was surprising for its vehemence, the other Mahler I heard this week was unsurprising for a lack of it. Andris Nelsons can now be relied upon to draw beauty from the Boston Symphony Orchestra, and there was plenty of that in his easygoing account of the Third Symphony last Saturday, remarkable for the clarity and variety of its textures. But if there was experimentation in the sound, there was safety everywhere else, something I have often found with this conductor. For the sprawling Third to hang together, it needs a sense of purpose — something that Bernard Haitink usually provides, as in this Christmas Day performance with the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra in 1983. DAVID ALLEN
David Lang’s “the whisper opera,” an inventive piece of mysterious lyric theater, opened a run at the N.Y.U. Skirball Center this week. This abstract 65-minute “opera” for just one soprano, who mostly whispers sentence fragments, and four instrumentalists, who also whisper cryptic things while creating myriad sounds, could not be more intimate. Mr. Lang’s “the public domain” was the exact opposite: a 40-minute outdoor choral piece written for a thousand singers — professionals and amateurs alike — first performed on a steamy summer day in 2016 on the plaza at Lincoln Center. This video sometimes suggests that this inspiring performance was just a mass gathering. But during several stretches the collective impact and intriguing specificity of the music come through, especially when you see the conductor Simon Halsey energetically gesturing to hundreds of singers. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Read our review of “the whisper opera,” running through Feb. 4.
The London Sinfonietta celebrated its 50th birthday on Wednesday with a concert at the Royal Festival Hall. This venerable contemporary music ensemble showed off its flexibility, scaling from solo saxophone (in a piece by the British composer Deborah Pritchard) to eight players for Stravinsky’s “Octet” and a full orchestra for a new piano concerto (for the left hand only) by Hans Abrahamsen. The optimal size was somewhere in the middle, and the highlight of the evening was Ligeti’s “Chamber Concerto,” which ends with a scuttling Presto. Light as a cobweb, Ligeti’s spidery thread passed from instrument to instrument in a quicksilver succession of changing textures. MATTHEW ANDERSON
Read our piece on the Sinfonietta’s anniversary.
Earlier this month, I saw the composer and flutist Nicole Mitchell lead a new group on the closing night of Winter Jazzfest. On Sunday, at National Sawdust in Brooklyn, I heard another recent piece by Ms. Mitchell, performed by the International Contemporary Ensemble (ICE). Like some of the composer’s other works, “Inescapable Spiral” emphasizes communal aspects of music-making, with entrances of instruments occasionally cued by performers from another section. The graceful ease of the composition comes through in a video of the world premiere last summer at the Ojai Festival in California, by a group that included Ms. Mitchell, players from ICE and students from the University of California, Irvine. At one point, when a flute-and-clarinet trio finishes meditating on a gently flowing passage, ICE flutist Alice Teyssier gives a nod. An accordion enters, adding an edgier texture, and is shortly joined by another flute and an additional string duo, all of whom launch into some of Ms. Mitchell’s more hurtling motifs. This movement between the placid and the chattering never seems forced or anxious, but rather like the product of a collective’s communion. SETH COLTER WALLS
Read our profile of “an innovative flutist with an Afrofuturist vision.”
The Juilliard School’s annual festival of contemporary music, Focus!, set itself a fascinating problem this year with its concentration on Chinese composers. As the festival director, Joel Sachs, explains in the program book, many composers active in China continue to use traditional Chinese instruments, which Juilliard does not teach, and the whole point of the festival is to involve students. But in the concluding orchestral concert, on Friday, Wei-Yang Andy Lin, a viola student, will play the solo part in Guo Wenjing’s “Wild Grass,” a concerto for erhu, the traditional two-string fiddle, played upright. Mr. Lin’s virtuosity on the erhu is well displayed in this song, “Parting After Wedding.” JAMES R. OESTREICH
Read our piece on Juilliard’s Focus! festival.
