Classical Music in NYC This Week
Our guide to the city’s best classical music and opera. 
AMERICAN SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA at Carnegie Hall (Jan. 28, 2 p.m.). This is a week oddly short of orchestral music, with even the New York Philharmonic taking a deserved break. Fill the gap with Leon Botstein and his adventurous band, and this program looking at Jewish composers in the Soviet Union. Music by Mieczyslaw Weinberg takes up the first half, with his “Rhapsody on Moldavian Themes” and the Symphony No. 5. After intermission, a work you’re unlikely ever to have another opportunity to hear: Veniamin Fleishman’s “Rothschild’s Violin.” Fleishman was Shostakovich’s student, and after he was killed while serving in the Red Army, his teacher completed this one-act opera, based on a Chekhov story.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
ATTACCA QUARTET at the Church of the Intercession (Feb. 1, 8 p.m.). Part of the Crypt Sessions, this fine young quartet, which made its name with a welcome survey of Haydn’s 68 works in the genre, performs Beethoven’s vast Op. 132, with its long, slow paean of thanks at its core. Fork out for the concert, and there’s a wine tasting beforehand.deathofclassical.com
‘HERE BE SIRENS’ at National Sawdust (Jan. 28, 4 p.m.). Kate Soper was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize last year, for her “Ipsa Dixit,” and here is a rare chance to hear an earlier chamber opera, which had its premiere in 2014. Victoria Benson, Claire Myers McCormick and Devony Smith are the three sopranos, in a production directed by Amber Treadway.646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org
JUILLIARD415 at Alice Tully Hall (Jan. 29, 7:30 p.m.). The Baroque violinist Rachel Podger is the guest artist for this concert from Juilliard’s period-instrument band, and she leads a program entirely of Telemann, ranging all the way from a violin sonata to fuller, ensemble works.212-799-5000, juilliard.edu
RAPHAEL CENDO at Miller Theater (Feb. 1, 8 p.m.). One of the most important things about the indispensable Miller Theater’s composer portraits series in the last few years has been to draw attention to good European composers whose work, for whatever reason, has not quite received the performances it deserves on this side of the Atlantic—or at least to flesh out their reputation. Here’s one of those concerts, played by Yarn/Wire and Either/Or, and including “Direct Action” and the American premier of “Substance.”212-854-7799, millertheatre.org
STEPHEN HOUGH at Carnegie Hall (Jan. 30, 8 p.m.). Mr. Hough, a suave and skillful pianist, recently released an attractive new recording of Debussy, on the Hyperion label, that is more than worth checking out. Highlights of that are on offer in this recital, where the two books of “Images” act as a counterweight to Schumann’s Fantasy in C and Beethoven’s “Appassionata” sonata — and he’s throwing in the “Clair de lune” for good measure.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
