Pop, Rock and Jazz in NYC This Week
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz.
BLACK REBEL MOTORCYCLE CLUB at Brooklyn Steel (Feb. 2, 9 p.m.). Named for the leather-clad toughs from the 1953 film “The Wild One,” this California band started making heavy, heady rock around the turn of the millennium — its 2001 debut, “B.R.M.C.,” is a minor classic of that time — and never stopped. The eighth Black Rebel Motorcycle Club album, “Wrong Creatures,” arrived in January. The group’s sound may no longer reflect the latest fashions, but it’s somehow comforting to find it unchanged after all these years.bowerypresents.com/brooklyn-steel
BROCKHAMPTON at Irving Plaza (Feb. 2-4, 9 p.m.). This freewheeling crew of rappers and producers, which traces its origins to a popular online forum for fans of Kanye West, has energy and charisma to spare. Brockhampton released its first, second and third full-length studio albums in 2017 — “Saturation II,” from August, is the one to try if you’re short on time, although they’re all solid listens — and has a fourth on the way. The group sold out three nights at Irving Plaza — capacity 1,000 — this week, and while that fact suggests there will be opportunities to see Brockhampton at bigger venues soon enough, the resale market is there for those who can’t wait that long.212-777-6817, irvingplaza.com
JOOLS HOLLAND at Blue Note (through Feb. 4, 8 p.m. and 10:30 p.m.). If you’ve ever hummed along to “Pulling Mussels (From the Shell)” or another of the new-wave classics Squeeze released between 1978 and 1980, you’ve likely enjoyed Jools Holland’s genial piano and keyboard work. Mr. Holland, who left that band in 1981, is better known today as the host of a long-running BBC2 show, but he continues to record music that falls somewhere between supper-club jazz and smooth R&B. These twice-nightly engagements in the West Village are his first performances in the United States in well over a decade.212-475-8592, bluenotejazz.com/newyork
NADINE at Baby’s All Right (Feb. 8, 8 p.m.). Nadine’s recent single “Ultra Pink” is the kind of song that makes one wonder why its creators aren’t more famous yet: light as a feather, cryptic and cool in just the right proportions to inspire repeat listening. There’s more where that came from on this indie-pop trio’s just-released debut LP, “Oh My.” Lexie, a side project of the singer-songwriter Greta Kline (of Frankie Cosmos), will be among the opening acts on Thursday night.877-987-6487, babysallright.com
OPEN MIKE EAGLE at Music Hall of Williamsburg (Feb. 5, 9 p.m.). Between 1962 and 2007, the Robert Taylor Homes provided public housing for many thousands of South Side Chicagoans. One of them was Open Mike Eagle, the deft juggler of syllables and emotions behind last year’s “Brick Body Kids Still Daydream,” an excellent concept album about the now-demolished projects where he grew up. Arrive early to this Monday night show to see him open for Why?, a group of rap eccentrics.888-929-7849, musichallofwilliamsburg.com
THE RADIO DEPT. at Warsaw (Feb. 3, 9 p.m.). This Swedish duo won an international fan base with the warm-hued, soft-spoken synth-pop of 2010’s “Clinging to a Scheme,” then took a sharp turn toward dance music and political agitation on its 2016 follow-up, “Running Out of Love.” Remarkably, the Radio Dept. pulled it off, winning strong reviews for the latter album despite the long delay. Come sway to the rhythm of “Swedish Guns,” undoubtedly the best song ever written about the Scandinavian arms trade, at this Brooklyn show.866-777-8932, warsawconcerts.com
SHILPA RAY at Union Pool (Feb. 3, 8 p.m.). A love letter to New York delivered with a sarcastic shrug, the singer-songwriter Shilpa Ray’s 2017 album “Door Girl” finds meaning in the most mundane of city incidents. (“Add Value Add Time” is an existential meditation on a MetroCard vending machine, and “My World Shatters by the BQE” is self-explanatory.) The LP’s title alludes to Ms. Ray’s experience checking IDs at the Lower East Side venue Piano’s; on Saturday, she will be a couple of L train stops away, performing at this Williamsburg, Brooklyn, bar.877-987-6487, union-pool.com
SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON
BILAL AND THE ONYX COLLECTIVE at Le Poisson Rouge (Feb. 8, 8:30 p.m.). Think of Bilal as the mysterious figure at the gate between neo-soul contemplation and jazz digression. He’s possessed of a high and keening voice that can seem to reach to the stars, but never shakes off the dust and grime of the earth. He’s often heard alongside figures like Robert Glasper, Common and Kendrick Lamar, but his own music is a captivating mélange, switching grooves and textures often. Opening for Bilal at this show is the Onyx Collective, a federation of young improvisers making low-lit, expansively improvised jazz, often with collaborators from the worlds of hip-hop, R&B and spoken word.212-505-3474, lpr.com
DUANE EUBANKS QUARTET at Cornelia Street Café (Feb. 2, 8:30 and 10 p.m.). Mr. Eubanks boasts a tawny trumpet tone and an understated self-assurance as an improviser, but he’s equally talented as a composer of memorable postbop melodies. His tunes, usually taken at a snug, unhurried clip, mix lyricism and sly rhythmic displacement, drawing upon the influences of 1950s Miles Davis and ’70s Woody Shaw, as well as the soul music of his Philadelphia hometown. Mr. Eubanks has a new album on the way via SmallsLive. In the meantime, you can catch him at Cornelia Street Café, helming a masterful quartet of longtime collaborators: the pianist James Hurt, the bassist Tarus Mateen and the drummer Eric McPherson.212-989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com
JOE MORRIS AND TOMAS FUJIWARA at iBeam Brooklyn (Feb. 8, 8:30 p.m.). Mr. Morris, a guitarist, plays with bladelike concision and slippery counterintuition. Mr. Fujiwara, as both a drummer and composer, takes a different path to confrontation; he lets things develop slowly, striking the drums with a sense of what’s immediately to come as well as what’s happening in the moment. He plays often with guitarists, but rarely with Mr. Morris. Expect a bevy of risk taking and pleasant surprises.ibeambrooklyn.com
DAVID MURRAY QUARTET at Birdland (through Feb. 3, 8:30 and 11 p.m.). Mr. Murray, one of jazz’s most potent and prolific tenor saxophonists, was the wunderkind of New York’s downtown scene in the 1970s and ’80s. Now, after a long hiatus in Europe, he is again living in the city. As it happens, he never stopped making vital, bridling music at the cusp of postbop and free jazz. This month he will release an album, “Blues for Memo,” featuring an all-star quartet, as well as cutting poetic commentary from Saul Williams. Here he performs with Jaribu Shahid on bass and Nasheet Waits on drums, both of whom are on the album, as well as the iconoclastic pianist Lafayette Gilchrist.212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com
LINDA MAY HAN OH at the Stone at New School (Feb. 2-3, 8:30 p.m.). Ms. Oh treats the bass as a melody instrument, tracing lines that seem to crest hills and slither down streams; all the while she maintains a full-bodied, punctilious attack, goading and supporting the silvery flow of her ensemble. Her latest album, “Walk Against Wind,” was a standout release of 2017. On Friday she performs with a quartet featuring the tenor saxophonist Melissa Aldana, the pianist Fabian Almazan and the drummer Dan Weiss. Saturday she presents Adventurine, a string quartet plus a jazz quartet, with the alto saxophonist Miguel Zenón as a featured soloist. thestonenyc.com
JAMISON ROSS at Jazz Standard (through Feb. 4, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Ross, a drummer, won the 2012 Thelonious Monk International Jazz Competition, usually a coronation ceremony for the next rising star in straight-ahead jazz. But then he went right back to doing what he loves: uniting New Orleans funk and second line with modern gospel, classic doo-wop and soul jazz. For this run of performances, Mr. Ross celebrates the release of “All for One,” his most recent album, with help from the road-tested personnel on that recording: Rick Lollar on guitar, Chris Pattishall on piano, Cory Irvin on Hammond B3 organ and Barry Stephenson on bass.212-576-2232, jazzstandard.com
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO
