Classical Music in NYC This Week
Our guide to the city’s best classical music and opera.
AXIOM at the Peter Jay Sharp Theater (Feb. 2, 7:30 p.m.). Conductor Jeffrey Milarsky leads Juilliard’s contemporary music group in a free performance of “Schnee,” a beguiling, wintry work completed in 2008 by Hans Abrahamsen, the Danish composer who found fame — and a prestigious Grawemeyer Award — for his recent “let me tell you.”212-799-5000, juilliard.edu
JOSHUA BELL AND JEREMY DENK at Carnegie Hall (Feb. 7, 8 p.m.). On the face of it, this is an odd duo, but Mr. Bell, the lyrical, pristine violinist, and Mr. Denk, a cheeky and offbeat pianist, make for a fine partnership. For the annual Isaac Stern Memorial Concert, they play Mozart, Strauss, Janacek and Schubert.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
JULIUS EASTMAN at the Kitchen (Feb. 3, 8 p.m.). The last concert in this important retrospective of Eastman’s renascent work includes “Trumpet,” played by TILT Brass under the direction of Christopher McIntyre; “Macle,” sung by a superb vocal ensemble, Ekmeles; “Prelude to the Holy Presence of Joan d’Arc,” with Julian Terrell Otis as the vocalist; and “The Holy Presence of Joan d’Arc,” transcribed by Clarice Jensen, who leads the American Contemporary Music Ensemble.212-255-5793, thekitchen.org
MATTHIAS GOERNE AND DANIIL TRIFONOV at Carnegie Hall (Feb. 6, 8 p.m.). Daniil Trifonov’s Perspectives series goes from strength to strength with this recital, and sees him paired with one of our leading exponents of song. On the bill are Berg’s “Four Songs,” Schumann’s “Dichterliebe,” Wolf’s “Three Poems of Michelangelo,” Brahms’s “Vier Ernste Gesänge” and selections of Shostakovich.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC at David Geffen Hall (Feb. 8, 7:30 p.m., through Feb. 10). That rare occurrence at the Philharmonic, this week: an unexpected program, with a major soloist, led by a heavyweight guest conductor. Antonio Pappano, the music director of the Royal Opera House and the Orchestra dell’Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia, is on the rostrum for Vaughan Williams’ “Fantasia on a Theme by Thomas Tallis,” Britten’s Piano Concerto, and Saint-Saëns’s “Organ” Symphony. Leif Ove Andsnes is the pianist; Kent Tritle is the organist.212-875-5656, nyphil.org
‘PARSIFAL’ at the Metropolitan Opera (Feb. 5, 6 p.m.). François Girard’s take — part mysterious, part mystifying — on Wagner’s last opera is one of the Met’s most interesting productions of the last decade or so, and returns for the first time since its premiere in 2013. There is no Jonas Kaufmann this time, but Klaus Florian Vogt is a veteran replacement in the title role, and Evelyn Herlitzius may well make for a fine Kundry. Three standouts from the earlier run return: René Pape as Gurnemanz, Peter Mattei as Amfortas and Evgeny Nikitin as Klingsor. Yannick Nézet-Séguin, future music director of the house, conducts.212-362-6000, metopera.org
TELEGRAPH QUARTET at Weill Recital Hall (Feb. 6, 7:30 p.m.). Add another young quartet to the cornucopia of excellence we are treated to at the moment, with these winners of the Naumburg Chamber Music Award. Encouraging programming, too: Kirchner’s String Quartet No. 1, Schoenberg’s String Quartet No. 1 and the premiere of Robert Sirota’s String Quartet No. 3, “Wave Upon Wave.”212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
