Pop, Rock and Jazz in NYC This Week
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz.
AVA LUNA at Joe’s Pub (Feb. 10, 9:30 p.m.). Like many indie-rock acts, this Brooklyn-based band has drawn inspiration from the melodic seductions of Serge Gainsbourg. In a more unusual move, Ava Luna both honor and challenge that source material through a cleverly revised cover of the French songwriter’s 1971 album “Histoire de Melody Nelson,” with their own Becca Kauffman singing Mr. Gainsbourg’s parts. She and her bandmates, who released their take on the album on vinyl in December, will reprise it on Saturday night.212-967-7555, joespub.publictheater.org
NOEL GALLAGHER’S HIGH FLYING BIRDS at Radio City Music Hall (Feb. 15, 8 p.m.). Noel Gallagher once told The New York Times that Oasis would have seen much more success in this country if their lead singer, his brother Liam, hadn’t flaked on a crucial 1996 tour: “That killed us stone dead in America. We never recovered.” The English guitarist and songwriter will face no such obstacle on his latest tour of the United States with this band, whose 2017 album, “Who Built the Moon?,” is a pleasantly psychedelic romp. And while some Oasis fans may miss the intraband drama of old, Mr. Gallagher has proved repeatedly in the eight years since going solo that he is a highly entertaining frontman in his own right.866-858-0008, radiocity.com
HALEY HEYNDERICKX at Berlin (Feb. 9, 8 p.m.). “Maybe my God has thick hips and big lips,” Haley Heynderickx suggests on “Untitled God Song,” an extraordinary catalog of personal metaphors for the divine. (Later, Ms. Heynderickx imagines God creating a spectacular sunset by accident: “She’s the quick glimpse of heaven, forgetting her headlights are on.”) The Oregon-based folk-rock songwriter will perform selections from her upcoming debut album, “I Need to Start a Garden,” at this East Village bar on Friday night.877-987-6487, ticketfly.com
MIJA at House of Yes (Feb. 15, 10 p.m.). Mija first came to national attention as an associate of the electronic superstar Skrillex. Her wide-ranging D.J. sets have always implied an interest in the world beyond the dance floor, and her recent single “Notice Me” makes good on that promise, pairing crisp, innovative synth-pop production with a compelling sketch of unrequited love. Listen closely to the records Mija spins at this appearance for further insight into her expanding universe.houseofyes.org
PALEHOUND AND WEAVES at Brooklyn Bazaar (Feb. 9, 8 p.m.). This show offers a two-for-one deal on guitar-based excitement: Palehound’s Ellen Kempner, from New England, wrings vivid emotions from her instrument, while Weaves, from Toronto, explore the wilder side of psychedelic pop. Both released strong albums in 2017 (Palehound’s “A Place I’ll Always Go,” Weaves’ “Wide Open”), and both put on consistently memorable shows. Show up on time to make sure you don’t miss either one.877-987-6487, bkbazaar.com
PALM at Market Hotel (Feb. 9, 9 p.m.). Palm’s 2015 full-length debut, “Trading Basics,” and 2017 EP, “Shadow Expert,” shared a remarkable commitment to resisting the obvious. Songs started off on unsettling tones, then torqued in even stranger directions. The Philadelphia-based art-rock band’s second album, “Rock Island,” is out this Friday, and it’s even more inventive, with highlights that suggest a curious hybrid of Beach Boys melodies and Chicago footwork rhythms. Palm will celebrate the LP with a show at this beloved D.I.Y. space in Bushwick, Brooklyn.877-987-6487, ticketfly.com
VILLAGE OF LOVE at Music Hall of Williamsburg (Feb. 14, 8 p.m.). Bush Tetras’ classic post-punk dart “Too Many Creeps” diagnosed a fundamental societal problem circa 1980 and continues to ring all too true today. That group is one of several acts performing at this annual Valentine’s Day fund-raiser for Planned Parenthood’s New York chapter, along with Kid Congo Powers (of the Cramps), Shilpa Ray and others. The Lemon Twigs, young 1960s-pop revivalists from Long Island, will headline the night.888-929-7849, musichallofwilliamsburg.com
SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON
DAVELL CRAWFORD AND PEDRITO MARTINEZ at the Blue Note (Feb. 13, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). A New Orleans pianist and a Havana-born percussionist, Mr. Crawford and Mr. Martinez are two former prodigies who hail from opposite sides of the Gulf of Mexico. Both have high, enchanting singing voices, and each of them upholds a traditional style while drawing broad connections. Mr. Crawford inherited the robust piano acrobatics of Professor Longhair and Henry Butler, pulling it into contact with the broader American R&B tradition. Mr. Martinez built his musical backbone in Santeria ceremonies and Havana watering holes, and his svelte playing on the congas and the sacred batá drum has made him a sought-after side musician, as well as a bandleader of growing renown.212-475-8592, bluenote.net
AMIR ELSAFFAR AND RIVERS OF SOUND at N.Y.U. Skirball Center (Feb. 10, 7:30 p.m.). Balancing cool forbearance and sauntering grace, the 17-piece ensemble Rivers of Sound represent an exceptional gathering of instrumentalists from musical traditions across Asia and the Americas. On the group’s beguiling debut album, “Not Two,” released last year, Mr. ElSaffar’s trumpet flutters above a weave of plucked strings and assorted percussion (the American drum kit, the Indian mridangam, the Egyptian dumbek), creating an illusion of endless development and broad traversal.212-998-4941, nyuskirball.org
BILLY HART QUARTET at Jazz Standard (through Feb. 11, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Hart developed a reputation in the 1970s as one of the most adaptive and sympathetic drummers in jazz, adding subtle shading and suspense-building mobility to Herbie Hancock’s electric fusion, Pharoah Sanders’s avant-garde spiritualism and Billy Harper’s Afrocentric postbop. Mr. Hart is a slow burner with no particular interest in clean resolution, and he’s long produced engrossing work as a bandleader who lives by those principles. In the past dozen years, he has led this esteemed quartet, performing his own dusky compositions and those of his younger band mates: the tenor saxophonist Mark Turner, the pianist Ethan Iverson and the bassist Ben Street.212-576-2232, jazzstandard.com
SHEILA JORDAN at Mezzrow (Feb. 14, 8 and 9:30 p.m.). Cheeky, importunate and canny, Ms. Jordan’s voice is one of the great standard-bearing instruments of midcentury jazz. Now 89 and a National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master, she still has that mix of sagacity and ingenuous charm that endeared her to discerning listeners in the 1960s. For this Valentine’s Day show, Ms. Jordan appears with two well-traveled accompanists, the pianist John DiMartino and the bassist Harvie S.646-476-4346, mezzrow.com
GREGORY PORTER at Carnegie Hall (Feb. 14, 8 p.m.). Last year the stout-voiced Mr. Porter released “Nat King Cole & Me,” a tribute album featuring some of Cole’s best-known songs, rendered with resplendent backing from the London Symphony Orchestra. (You might say the record was bound to happen: In 2004, before he was a big name, Mr. Porter presented an autobiographical musical of a similar name.) This Valentine’s Day concert marks Mr. Porter’s debut at Carnegie Hall, where Cole gave some of the most momentous performances of his career.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
LIZZ WRIGHT at Lincoln Center (Feb. 14, 8:30 p.m.). “Grace,” Ms. Wright’s sixth album, finds her planted ankle-deep in the Southern soil, while sending her ample, burgundy voice aloft. The album — one of last year’s finest — feels remarkably personal, despite featuring just one original tune. Instead Ms. Wright bridges a wide tradition of American song, from gospel (“Singing in My Soul”) to New Orleanian balladry (“Southern Nights”) to seminal Christian rock (“Every Grain of Sand”). Ms. Wright will draw from that record at this concert, in the Appel Room at Jazz at Lincoln Center.212-721-6500, jazz.org
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO
