‘Parsifal’ Returns: The 8 Best Classical Music Moments of the Week on YouTube
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them on YouTube. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
When the Metropolitan Opera presented François Girard’s bleakly powerful production of Wagner’s “Parsifal” in 2013, Peter Mattei’s wrenching performance as the suffering Amfortas was overwhelming. In the revival that opened this week, he is, if anything, greater. It’s easy to forget that he first proved himself at the Met as a suave, lively singer in Mozart and Rossini. That refined yet still virile lyricism comes through in this excerpt from a Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra performance, conducted by Riccardo Chailly, of Bach’s “St. Matthew Passion.” Singing the lilting aria “Mache dich, mein Herze rein,” Mr. Mattei conveys affirmation and hope. I love the passage when the mood shifts (“May He find rest in me”) and Mr. Mattei becomes solemn, almost meek. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Read our review of this “magnificent” revival of “Parsifal.”
“Watch the Met Opera Stage a Sea of Blood”
Are any opera roles harder to sing convincingly than Wagner’s boyish heroes? It is not easy to find a tenor with both the power to contend with a jumbo orchestra and the youthful naïveté to persuade in, say, Siegfried in the “Ring” cycle. (“He’s very brave, and he’s very stupid,” Anna Russell put it in her funny-because-it’s-true sketch.) Or the title role in “Parsifal,” who is a “pure fool.” Which makes Klaus Florian Vogt all the more remarkable in the Met’s current “Parsifal” revival. Here, as he gains wisdom through compassion in Act II, he musters a sound completely unlike the bronzed, occasionally barky heldentenors who often do the role — and sings with an innocence and sweetness that is more frequently associated with Mozart roles. But with power. MICHAEL COOPER
The premiere of a new “realization” of Julius Eastman’s long-lost “Trumpet” on Saturday made for the most exciting 20 minutes of music I heard during the Kitchen’s ongoing retrospective devoted to the composer. Chris McIntyre’s new edition of the piece is the product of some dedicated audio transcription, as well as recently discovered notated fragments; it successfully brought across the vivid variety of approaches in many Eastman works. The players of TILT Brass seemed ideally suited to handle that expressive range, at times calmly considering Eastman’s sustained tones, and at others romping through dense layers of ecstatic, fast-repeating riffs. The trumpeter Jaimie Branch guested with the group, and took a fiery solo during a stretch that allowed for improvisation. But she also collaborated memorably during mellower passages, which in turn reminded me of a tune, “Leaves of Glass,” from her most recent album. A group of brass players finds itself swept up in an electroacoustic swirl that Alvin Lucier might appreciate. While navigating that fog, the instrumentalists only briefly touch on notes of distress, before eventually relaxing back into a gentler state of communion. SETH COLTER WALLS
Read about the reconstruction of “Trumpet.”
“A Long-Lost Composer Is Raised From the Dead”
At Zankel Hall on Thursday, Nico Muhly and an ensemble of close friends presented a revelatory program of Philip Glass rarities from the composer’s vast archive. For me, the highlight was an excerpt from the Rome section of “the CIVIL warS,” Robert Wilson’s only partially realized cycle of operas written for the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles. At the concert, Laurie Anderson reprised her role as one of the opera’s soloists, delivering Beckett-like lines over Mr. Glass’s signature arpeggios and pulsating rhythms. You can hear her speak in this recording with the Radio Filharmonisch Orkest in the Netherlands, in which her inflections are enchanting, poignant and utterly operatic. As she left the stage on Thursday, Mr. Muhly picked up his microphone and said what many people in the hall must have been thinking: “I’m obsessed with Laurie Anderson. That’s all.” JOSHUA BARONE
Read our interview with Nico Muhly about his favorite page from the Philip Glass archive.
In the latest issue of the New York Review of Books, the tenor (and former choir boy) Ian Bostridge has an elegant reflection on the English choral tradition and his place within it. He makes much of how the Elizabethan Reformation drove the creativity of Thomas Tallis and William Byrd, and rightly so. But a Boston ensemble, Blue Heron, has labored valiantly in recent years to bring to light the works of a generation or two prior, during the reign of Henry VIII. The group’s concert last weekend concentrated on the “Missa Veni sancte spiritus” by Richard Pygott, and, as ever, the honesty and pride of the group’s singing, directed by Scott Metcalfe, was as striking as the ingenuity of the music. Here’s music by Hugh Aston, from a concert last year, delivered with real attention to color and rhythm. DAVID ALLEN
The Boston Symphony is launching its serendipitous partnership with the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra this week, as Andris Nelsons combines the music directorship of both. Cue a party piece: Bach’s Concerto for Three Pianos, played by Thomas Adès, Kirill Gerstein and Jean-Yves Thibaudet. Any time I hear anything like that, I remember this video of four leading conductors trying to figure out how on earth to rehearse Bach together, with the string players of the Bavarian Radio Symphony looking on. There’s Wolfgang Sawallisch, all business and precision; Rudolf Kempe, nonchalant, effortless, with the odd smirk; Fritz Rieger, steady and avuncular; and Rafael Kubelik, easily the most brilliant of them all, slightly confused and trying to keep up. It’s all in German, but it’s fascinating nonetheless. DAVID ALLEN
In my effort to catch up on the best picture Oscar nominees, I keep finding myself wanting to buy tickets to see “Phantom Thread” again, if only for another opportunity to hear how its rich soundtrack, by Jonny Greenwood of Radiohead, so seamlessly blends with interstitial music by Debussy, Berlioz and Schubert, among others. Mr. Greenwood’s score has echoes of those classical masters, including in this track, the haunting “Phantom Thread” theme for solo violin (Daniel Pioro, according to the album credits). The implied polyphony here recalls Bach — specifically the Andante from his Violin Sonata No. 2 — but, like much of the soundtrack, it suggests the Baroque (and, at other moments, jazz and Romantic styles) while staying firmly in Mr. Greenwood’s idiosyncratic voice. JOSHUA BARONE
Among many accomplishments, the pianist Ian Hobson has an enormous repertoire. He has been recording the complete piano works of Chopin on the Zephyr label. (He’s up to Volume 12.) And starting last November, he began a six-program series at SubCulture on Bleecker Street, playing the complete piano works of Debussy (in honor of the centennial of the composer’s death) and (for contrast? for fun?) Ravel. The highlights of the third program this week included a rippling account of Ravel’s pathbreaking “Jeux d’eau,” two Debussy rarities, and Debussy’s familiar first book of “Images.” Mr. Hobson also plays lots of music by living composer, like this 2016 premiere at Merkin Concert Hall of Robert Chumbley’s “Three Etudes (by any other name…).” The spacious, hazy second one is especially appealing. (His next Debussy/Ravel program at SubCulture is Feb. 28.) ANTHONY TOMMASINI
