13 Pop, Rock and Jazz Concerts to Check Out in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
BORNS at Terminal 5 (Feb. 16, 8 p.m.). Borns is on the way up. The Michigan-born electro-pop singer’s breakthrough hit in 2015, “Electric Love,” has been streamed well over 100 million times on Spotify, and his recently released album, “Blue Madonna,” opens with a duet with Lana Del Rey, as if to underscore his ascent to the higher realms of pop stardom. It’s no wonder, then, that tickets to this performance at the 3,000-person-capacity Midtown club Terminal 5 sold out quickly. Fans of Borns’s fabulous falsetto can find reasonable options on the resale market — or wait until he inevitably returns to headline at an even more formidable venue.888-929-7849, terminal5nyc.com
PHOEBE BRIDGERS at Music Hall of Williamsburg (Feb. 22-23, 9 p.m.). “There are no words in the English language / I could scream to drown you out,” Phoebe Bridgers sings on “Motion Sickness,” an immediate highlight from her 2017 debut, “Stranger in the Alps.” (The album’s title refers to a line of shouted dialogue in certain versions of “The Big Lebowski.”) These Brooklyn shows, with support from the lucid singer-songwriter Soccer Mommy, are sold out, but the secondary market is worth a look.888-929-7849, musichallofwilliamsburg.com
CARLA BRUNI at the Town Hall (Feb. 16, 8 p.m.). On her 2017 album “French Touch,” the former first lady of France interprets songs by the Rolling Stones (“Miss You”), Depeche Mode (“Enjoy the Silence”) and even AC/DC (“Highway to Hell”) in a pleasantly languid chanson style. The sound evokes dim-lit clubs and Gauloises smoke, but it should suit the Town Hall’s historic auditorium just as well.212-997-6661, thetownhall.org
SIDNEY GISH at Silent Barn (Feb. 21, 8 p.m.). Close followers of Boston’s indie-rock scene have been listening to Sidney Gish for a while, and her most recent album, “No Dogs Allowed,” seems poised to win a wider audience for her crisp, inventive songwriting. (Hit play on “I Eat Salads Now” or “Good Magicians” for proof.) Ms. Gish is opening for the tuneful pop-punk band Remember Sports at this show. Get there early to make sure you don’t miss either act.877-987-6487, ticketfly.com
HOVVDY at Baby’s All Right (Feb. 16, 8 p.m.). Tempos stay slow and voices tender in this Austin, Tex., duo’s music, which is well suited to anyone who’s ever loved Yo La Tengo’s quieter moments. Their latest album, “Cranberry,” unfolds like an afternoon whose warm mood you remember long after the details have faded. Hovvdy (pronounced “Howdy”) will mark the LP’s release with this Brooklyn show.877-987-6487, babysallright.com
INTERFERENCE AV at AMC Empire 25 (Feb. 19-21, 8 p.m.). This free festival will turn the AMC Empire 25, a large Times Square movie theater, into a temporary hub of avant-garde music. On Monday night, the Midwestern electronic producer Jlin will headline; on Tuesday night, the long-running noise-rock act Lightning Bolt will take over; and the Sun Ra Arkestra will close out the event on Wednesday night. Experimental video projections, D.J. sets and more will round out the festivities.withfriends.co/clocktower
DAMIAN ‘JR. GONG’ MARLEY at PlayStation Theater (Feb. 22, 8 p.m.). Bob Marley’s youngest son has been a noteworthy reggae standard-bearer in his own right since the early 2000s, scoring an enduring solo hit with “Welcome to Jamrock” in 2005 and collaborating prominently with Nas and Mick Jagger, among others. Last year, he had a scene-stealing turn on Jay-Z’s Grammy-nominated album “4:44.” CyHi the Prynce and Stefflon Don open.212-930-1940, playstationtheater.com
SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON
ANDY BEY at Minton’s Playhouse (Feb. 22, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). With his round and crinkled baritone, Mr. Bey can turn jazz vocals into a vessel for close inspection and surprise (that beats the more typical role they play: delivering comfort and emotional payoff, without much work from the listener). Audiences in the 1960s knew him for his work in Andy and the Bey Sisters, a vocal trio, and in the ’70s he staked out distinctive terrain in the funk-fusion landscape. But since the 1990s, Mr. Bey, who doubles on piano, has thrived as a soloist. He performs jazz standards and his own poetic originals, letting the songs open up and slow down and sometimes nearly dissolve on his tongue.212-243-2222, mintonsharlem.com
GERALD CLAYTON QUARTET at Jazz Standard (through Feb. 18, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Clayton, a pianist with a lissome and prayerful touch, leads a quartet here featuring the bassist Yunior Terry, the drummer Obed Calvaire and the percussionist Gabo Lungo. The group is joined during this run by two special guests: On Friday, it’s the young vibraphonist Joel Ross; on Saturday and Sunday, the alto saxophonist Yosvany Terry. All of these musicians can play with ease and assurance, as if submitting to some ecstatic momentum, but they get there by different routes. Mr. Clayton’s piano playing cascades, illustrates and embellishes, whereas Mr. Ross likes to interpose and chatter, like a kinetic conversationalist. And Mr. Terry, on saxophone, treats the tousled rhythmic logic of Cuban rumba as his foundation, moving in arcs and dashes and sweeps of color.212-576-2232, jazzstandard.com
CORCORAN HOLT at Ginny’s Supper Club (Feb. 17, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Holt, a bassist known for his work alongside the saxophonist Kenny Garrett, moved to New York from Washington, D.C., more than a decade ago. The title of Mr. Holt’s newly released debut album, “The Mecca,” nods to the idea that New York is jazz’s promised land. But the record’s sound suggests something else: the proud complexity of his hometown’s own musical history. (For much of the 20th century, after all, Washington was a jewel of black arts and letters nearly on par with Harlem.) There’s the sturdy, Southern-tinged swing feel; the proud, muscular harmonies beneath the lead lines; the occasional hand-drum rhythms, suggesting a lifelong exposure to go-go music. He’ll play songs from “The Mecca” here with Keith Loftis on tenor saxophone, Ashlin Parker on trumpet, Benito Gonzalez on piano and McClenty Hunter on drums.212-421-3821, ginnyssupperclub.com
ALLEN LOWE at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola (Feb. 20, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Lowe doubles as an alto saxophonist and a kind of alternative cultural anthropologist. His histories of American popular music (“That Devilin’ Tune: A Jazz History 1900-1950” and “God Didn’t Like It: Electric Hillbillies, Singing Preachers and the Beginning of Rock and Roll, 1950-1970,” among others) reflect a fathomless musical knowledge and an iconoclastic streak. Those elements define his music too: a loose meld of American folklore, halcyon pop and free jazz. For this concert, Mr. Lowe has convened a 13-piece band to honor the heavy influence of John Coltrane’s 1960s work. He’s doing it in decidedly unconventional fashion, reaching back to the polyphonic sound of early-20th-century New Orleans.212-258-9595, jazz.org/dizzys
MIN XIAO-FEN WITH REZ ABBASI at Roulette (Feb. 18, 4 p.m.). Ms. Min plays the traditional pipa and other Chinese lutes with a hard-bitten, unflinching power. A conceptualist as well as a folklorist, she will present a new, original score for “The Goddess,” a seminal silent film from 1930s Shanghai. The music she has written draws from across the spectrum of Chinese heritage, including references to Tibetan chants as well as other folk forms, while remaining in contact with her jazz influences. Accompanying her is the prodigious guitarist Rez Abbasi.917-267-0368, roulette.org
JAY RODRIGUEZ AND SPECIAL GUESTS at Le Poisson Rouge (Feb. 20, 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Rodriguez plays with an unreserved flexibly on the tenor, alto and soprano saxophones; flute; and bass clarinet. Originally from Colombia, he has worked with artists from Prince to Elvis Costello to Marc Ribot. On his own forthcoming album, “Your Sound (Live at Dizzy’s Club Cola-Cola),” Mr. Rodriguez moves between idioms and energies as easily as he switches instruments. He celebrates the album’s release with this concert, featuring a powerhouse band: J. D. Allen on tenor saxophone, Arturo O’Farrill on piano, Melissa Slocum on bass, Victor Jones on drums and Billy Martin on percussion.212-505-3474, lpr.com
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO
