Yannick, Sooner: The 8 Best Classical Music Moments of the Week on YouTube
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them on YouTube. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
This week I’ve been revisiting the music of Johann Johannsson, the Icelandic composer who died on Feb. 9 at 48. I struggled to appreciate his 2016 album “Orphée,” on Deutsche Grammophon, but I have immense respect for his film scores, which are so complex and carefully considered that they transcend mere accompaniment. Take, for example, his soundtrack for the Stephen Hawking biopic “The Theory of Everything,” for which he won a Golden Globe in 2015. From the beginning, Johannsson’s music captures the movie’s mathematical and cosmic wonder. The score opens with a circular piano ostinato evocative of geometric precision. But the moment strings are added to the mix, the music takes flight to the heavens. JOSHUA BARONE
Read our obituary of Johann Johannsson.
I vividly remember the kid-in-the-candy-store look the conductor Yannick Nézet-Séguin had last season when I went backstage to watch him rehearse Wagner with the Metropolitan Opera’s orchestra for the first time. You can see him almost fighting back smiles in some passages here as they work together on the overture to “Der Fliegende Holländer.” The Met has gone through tough times since then, with the suspension of its former music director, James Levine, amid sexual misconduct accusations. So when the company announced this week that Mr. Nézet-Séguin would succeed Mr. Levine as music director next season, two years ahead of schedule, it was this memory of joyful music-making that came back to me. MICHAEL COOPER 
Read about his sped-up ascension.
Until last week I had never heard Britten’s Piano Concerto, which Leif Ove Andsnes performed with the New York Philharmonic. The piece is striking for how integrated the solo part is with the orchestral accompaniment. (Often the concerto could pass for a symphony, much like the Saint-Saëns “Organ” Symphony, which followed the intermission.) But it is also surprisingly funny. I sat next to one of our critics, and we both chuckled throughout. You can hear the humor in this recording with Mr. Andsnes and the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra, especially in the second movement, a beguiling and ironic waltz. As played by the orchestra, the theme is way over the top. For a brief moment, it repeats as a solo piano passage, which Mr. Andsnes delivered with a clever balance of satire and enigmatic nuance that revealed something darker beneath all the exuberance. JOSHUA BARONE
Read our review of Leif Ove Andsnes with the New York Philharmonic.
The American soprano Heidi Melton is singing Sieglinde beautifully this week in the New York Philharmonic’s performance of Act I from Wagner’s “Die Walküre.” She has been earning international acclaim as a Wagnerian in recent seasons. Here she is in a recording studio singing the sublime opening of the Act II love duet from “Tristan und Isolde” (a moment of amorous calm before the sensual storm) with the tenor Stuart Skelton and the forces of the English National Opera. In keeping with the company’s mission, the German libretto is performed in English translation. Catch the lovely passage about halfway in, when Ms. Melton sings this couplet: “In my breast the sun is hiding,/High above the stars are shining.” ANTHONY TOMMASINI
During the announcement of the 2018-19 season of the New York Philharmonic, Jaap van Zweden’s first as music director, one of the moments that signaled change involved the young pianist and composer Conrad Tao. He has been commissioned to write a piece that will be paired with, of all things, Bruckner’s august Eighth Symphony. During a brief video interview that was screened, Mr. Tao sheepishly admitted that he doesn’t really know Bruckner’s Eighth and probably wouldn’t have spent time with it had he not been tapped for the gig. Will this new piece sound anything like his “Iridescence for Piano and iPad,” which he performs here? I love the passage when cosmic piano chords leap about while haunting electronic voices and riffs flicker in the background. Call me crazy, but I think Bruckner would have liked it. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
The Los Angeles Philharmonic’s next season boasts several alluring themes and programs; one of the most exciting is a series devoted to works by William Grant Still, whose symphonies will be paired with works by Ellington, Gershwin and the contemporary composer Adolphus Hailstork. The announcement reminded me of a recently issued recording that adds to Still’s legacy, in a minor yet memorable fashion. The third release in New World Records’ ongoing Harlem Renaissance archival series, “Black Manhattan,” features Still’s 1919 arrangement of “The Slow Drag Blues,” a tune by Q. Roscoe Snowden. Throughout their performance, the Paragon Ragtime Orchestra channels the work’s bluesy effervescence. But it’s the re-entry of the full ensemble, after a solo piano interlude, that delights me most on each listen — as Still’s complementary lines mingle with real élan. Why isn’t his music played more often in New York? SETH COLTER WALLS
It was the concept that drew me to the new CD “Ciaconna: The Bass of Time,” from Crier Records, but it was the young violinist Robyn Bollinger who held me captive. Through solo works of Biber, Bach, Bartok and Berio, Ms. Bollinger explores the lineage of the chaconne or passacaglia, call it what you will, with its often obsessive focus on a bass figure. As so often, Berio’s obsessions, in his “Sequenza VIII,” are idiosyncratic, particularly when — after a long, somewhat static buildup — he seizes on a little twittering figure and sets it in manic perpetual motion, finally letting go only reluctantly. JAMES R. OESTREICH
Unlike the cheering throng in Zankel Hall on Thursday evening, I found the French pianist Alexandre Tharaud’s performance of Bach’s “Goldberg” Variations somewhat disappointing in its unevenness: at times, brilliantly virtuosic; at others, matter-of-fact and almost studentish. So I was grateful for his encore, a headlong tear through Scarlatti’s Sonata in D minor (K. 141). It was a wild ride, with much more fire and panache than his version here. JAMES R. OESTREICH
