28 Years After His Death, a Composer Gets a Publishing Deal
The rediscovery of the distinctive Minimalist composer Julius Eastman, who died in obscurity in 1990, took a major step forward on Wednesday, when the publisher G. Schirmer announced it would restore, reconstruct, publish and promote his music.
The publishing deal will ensure that the recent Eastman renaissance — spearheaded by a dedicated group of former colleagues, scholars and family members — will continue and grow. And it promises to restore the neglected work of a gay, black composer to the modern-music canon.
“In my opinion, the post-1950 history of American classical music is incomplete without inclusion of Julius Eastman’s contribution,” Robert Thompson, the president of G. Schirmer, wrote in an email.
When Eastman, who once said that he strove to be “black to the fullest, a musician to the fullest, a homosexual to the fullest,” died in Buffalo at 49, he had fallen on hard times. A onetime fixture of New York’s avant-garde music circles, he had been evicted from his East Village apartment and largely dropped off the radar. Many friends and colleagues did not learn of his death until The Village Voice published an obituary some eight months after the fact. Without extant scores or commercial recordings, his music seemed irretrievably lost.
But over the past two decades, some of those who knew and worked with Eastman, especially the composer Mary Jane Leach, have been painstakingly collecting and restoring his scattered works. In 2005, New World Records issued the first commercial Eastman release, a three-disc set called “Unjust Malaise.” In 2015, “Gay Guerrilla,” a book of essays that takes its title from one of his works, was published. This winter, The Kitchen, in New York City, presented “Julius Eastman: That Which is Fundamental,” an ambitious three-week festival.
“Now Julius has become the darling of this whole scene,” his younger brother, Gerry Eastman, a jazz musician responsible for Julius’s estate, said in a telephone interview. “I just wish he’d lived a bit longer.”
Mr. Eastman, 72, said that he was delighted that his brother’s music had been rediscovered, relieved that he would no longer have to serve as the gatekeeper for it, and that he expected the deal to bring the music to a much wider audience. He said that after years of people performing Eastman works for little or no money — and even large festivals haggling for fees he considered exploitatively low — the partnership with Schirmer would ensure the Eastman estate got its due.
“I’m relieved that they are taking this over,” he said. “We made a really good deal for both of us.”
Mr. Thompson said that since reaching agreement with the Eastman estate, Schirmer had begun cataloging the music.
“Schirmer’s plan is to publish all of the extant works,” he said. “Sadly, a number of works have been lost, and we are working with those musicians and scholars who have restored Eastman’s works from available source documents. Our goal is to restore, reconstruct and publish as much of Julius’s catalog as is artistically viable.”
Such restorations have been going on for some time. “Trumpet,” written for seven of that instrument and long thought lost, was recently reconstructed with the help of a photograph of the score’s first two pages and the transcription of a recording of a performance.
Gerry Eastman said that there were more revivals to come. “Some that I have, have never seen light of day,” he said. “I have a suitcase of his compositions, and some I don’t think have ever been played.”
