14 Pop, Rock and Jazz Concerts to Check Out in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
TAYLOR BENNETT at Gramercy Theater (Feb. 28, 8 p.m.). Taylor Bennett’s older brother is a rapper named Chance — perhaps you’ve heard of him? The two share a definite resemblance, but the younger Mr. Bennett has an engagingly loose approach to rhyme and a gravelly vocal register that set him apart from his celebrated sibling. Listen to their 2017 collaboration “Grown Up Fairy Tales” for a close study in their complementary strengths.212-614-6932, mercuryeastpresents.com/thegramercytheatre
DESMOND CHILD at Feinstein’s/54 Below (March 1-3, 7 p.m.). Whether you view Desmond Child as a genius or something less kind depends on your subjective opinion of Bon Jovi’s “Livin’ on a Prayer,” Aerosmith’s “Dude (Looks Like a Lady)” and Ricky Martin’s “Livin’ la Vida Loca,” all of which he co-wrote. What’s indisputable is that Mr. Child is one of the most successful songwriters of the past 30 years. These are his first concerts in many years, and they should be a treat for pop scholars and karaoke fans alike.646-476-3551, 54below.com
THE DANDY WARHOLS at Warsaw (Feb. 25, 8 p.m.). As we near the end of the present decade, it should come as no surprise that cultural nostalgia for the Y2K era is entering full swing. That’s good news for the Dandy Warhols, who released their best-known songs, “Bohemian Like You” and “We Used to Be Friends,” between 15 and 20 years ago. The polished pop-rock group will play this Greenpoint, Brooklyn, venue after a sold-out Feb. 23 date at Manhattan’s Highline Ballroom.866-777-8932, warsawconcerts.com
DIET CIG at Elsewhere (March 1, 8 p.m.). “Sixteen,” from this pop-punk duo’s 2017 full-length debut, is so poignant a sketch of romantic disappointment that it qualifies for entry into the all-time canon of songs on that theme. In concert, Diet Cig are noisy and charming. They often play “Sixteen” first, so don’t be late to this Bushwick, Brooklyn, show if you hope to hear it. Great Grandpa and the Spook School open.elsewherebrooklyn.com
OLDEN YOLK at Union Pool (Feb. 24, 8 p.m.). The guitars in Olden Yolk’s “Cut to the Quick” evoke British folk music from the 1960s, the drums sound like Cologne in 1972 and the video appears to take place in New York’s East Village. It’s an intoxicating combination, and there’s more where that came from on the band’s excellent new self-titled debut LP. Find out how bandleaders Shane Butler and Caity Shaffer’s coolly psychedelic style plays live at this show.877-435-9849, union-pool.com
TYLER THE CREATOR AND VINCE STAPLES at the Theater at Madison Square Garden (Feb. 23-24, 7:30 p.m.). Both of the rappers on this co-headlining tour pulled off impressive swerves last year: Tyler the Creator’s “Flower Boy” was warm and reflective where his past work was often harsh and confrontational, and Vince Staples’s “Big Fish Theory” brilliantly integrated techno and house music into his tightly crafted lyrical approach. Tyler and Mr. Staples, who memorably performed at the Theater at Madison Square Garden in 2015, return there for two nights this weekend.800-745-3000, msg.com
XYLOURIS WHITE at Murmrr Ballroom (Feb. 28, 8 p.m.). The Cretan lute player Giorgos Xylouris and the Australian drummer Jim White are the twin engines of this duo, whose music ranges through traditional Greek folk, free jazz and any number of other improvised modes. Xylouris White’s third album, “Mother,” has a more tender touch than their first two (listen to the lovely album closer, “Lullaby”), a quality that should lend itself well to this Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, venue.877-435-9849, murmrr.com
SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON
KENNY BARRON at Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts (Feb. 24, 8 p.m.). The sparkling lyricism of Mr. Barron’s piano comes through at many angles. He might drop a chord of dewdrop sensitivity into the middle of a passage of heavily percussive playing; he might change the hue of a comrade’s solo by suggesting a subtle countermelody underneath. At the end of the day, Mr. Barron will be known for his work in small postbop combos (his own, and those led by a who’s who of jazz greats). But in solo performances, his easy flexibility flourishes — a constant feed of subtle redirections. Here he plays alone at Brooklyn College’s Kumble Theater.718-951-4500, brooklyncenter.org
DAVE DOUGLAS at Jazz at Lincoln Center (Feb. 23-24, 7 and 9:30 p.m.). An eclectic trumpet virtuoso who’s been a leading voice on his instrument since the 1990s, Mr. Douglas presents “Dizzy Atmosphere,” a program of improvisations and extrapolations based on Dizzy Gillespie’s compositions. He’s joined onstage by a cast of prodigious comrades: the trumpeter Ambrose Akinmusire, the pianist Gerald Clayton, the guitarist Bill Frisell, the bassist Linda May Han Oh and the drummer Joey Baron.212-721-6500, jazz.org
AMIRTHA KIDAMBI at Roulette (Feb. 27, 8 p.m.). As a vocalist, Ms. Kidambi is vast and blustery and open, but always sure of step. As a composer, she is often minimal, using songs to establish some general shapes and then letting improvisation do the rest of the work. At least, that’s how things work in Elder Ones, her excellent quartet, in which she sings and plays the harmonium. That group will perform at this concert. But first Ms. Kidambi will deliver something different: “Yajna,” a new suite for solo vocals meant as a musical ablution for trying times.917-267-0368, roulette.org
CARMEN LUNDY at Jazz Standard (through Feb. 25, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Ms. Lundy, a widely respected vocalist, is possessed of an enthusiastic delivery and a thick vibrato. Last year she released “Code Noir,” an album of 12 simmering originals that address subjects of romantic commitment, political resistance and solidarity. This weekend she appears with a stellar band of accompanists: the pianist Patrice Rushen, the guitarist Andrew Renfroe, the bassist Kenny Davis and the drummer Kendrick Scott.212-576-2232, jazzstandard.com
MACEO PARKER at the Blue Note (Feb. 27-March 4, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). More than any saxophonist, Mr. Parker has helped define the sound of funk music. He threw splashes of grease into James Brown’s music as a prominent soloist in that band for most of the 1960s, then moved on to the subversive, psychedelic funk of Parliament and Funkadelic, George Clinton’s ensembles. Since the 1990s, Mr. Parker has been stomping across the globe with his own groups, delivering a satisfying, hip-swiveling mélange of funk and soul classics and his own repertoire.212-475-8592, bluenote.net
BEN WENDEL SEASONS BAND at the Village Vanguard (Feb. 27-March 4, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Wendel is a tenor saxophonist of cool, even tone and steam-engine momentum. In 2015 he created a work titled “The Seasons,” inspired by Tchaikovsky’s set of short pieces by the same name. It includes 12 tunes — which Mr. Wendel released over 12 months — each dedicated to another fellow musician. Here he presents that music with Gilad Hekselman on guitar, Aaron Parks on piano, Matt Brewer on bass and Eric Harland on drums.212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com
JOHN ZORN’S ‘IMPROV NIGHTS’ at the Stone (Feb. 23-25, 8:30 p.m.). For almost 13 years, this one-room venue in Alphabet City has been New York’s truest and coziest — if not its comfiest — home for experimental improvising. This weekend marks the end of an era: After these performances, John Zorn, the saxophone luminary and Stone proprietor, is moving the establishment to a small theater space at the New School. Mr. Zorn closes things out with a series of “Improv Nights,” bringing together an overspill of top-shelf collaborators to improvise in a loose, valedictory rotation.thestonenyc.com
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO
