13 Pop, Rock and Jazz Concerts to Check Out in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead. Plus, a Times Talks event.
GAZ COOMBES at Baby’s All Right (March 5, 8 p.m.) and Mercury Lounge (March 6, 6:30 p.m.). Starting in the mid-1990s, Gaz Coombes brought a madcap energy to the Brit-pop era as the lead singer of Supergrass. (If you’ve ever seen “Clueless,” you know the band’s biggest hit, 1995’s “Alright.”) Since that group’s breakup in 2010, Mr. Coombes has continued making music on a more modest scale, and these shows will preview his new solo LP, “World’s Strongest Man,” out this May.877-987-6487, babysallright.com; mercuryeastpresents.com/mercurylounge
CUPCAKKE at Le Poisson Rouge (March 6, 8:30 p.m.). There’s no easy way to quote Cupcakke’s best lyrics in a family newspaper, so let’s just say that if you appreciate artful raunch, you should listen to her most recent album, “Ephorize,” immediately. In the past year, the rapper, known offstage as Elizabeth Harris, has gained renown far outside Chicago, her hometown, for her very funny, profoundly unprintable observations on sex and other topics.212-505-3474, lpr.com
FRIGS at Alphaville (March 3, 8 p.m.). Led by the charismatic singer (and sometimes screamer) Bria Salmena, this Toronto post-punk band is good at making noise sound new. The best songs on their debut album, “Basic Behaviour,” have an intensity that’s hard to shake. Start with recent single “Talking Pictures” for a taste — or see this show, which Frigs will headline with the Brooklyn trio Bambara.877-987-6487, alphavillebk.com
EZRA FURMAN AND ANNA BURCH at Bowery Ballroom (March 7, 9 p.m.). Ezra Furman’s most recent album, “Transangelic Exodus,” is a radical revision of the American rock canon. Songs like “Suck the Blood From My Wound” (where Mr. Furman rhymes “Pasadena” with “deus ex machina”) use distinctly Springsteen-esque tropes — forbidden lovers, cars speeding toward state lines — to tell a story about life outside restrictive social binaries. Arrive at this show early to catch an opening set by the witty singer-songwriter Anna Burch.877-987-6487, mercuryeastpresents.com/boweryballroom
JEEZY AND TEE GRIZZLEY at PlayStation Theater (March 2, 8 p.m.). There was a time when Jeezy, with his booming laugh and his controversial T-shirts, embodied the energy of young Atlanta. Southern rap has undergone several transformations in the decade-plus since his debut, but the high points of Jeezy’s catalog have held up well. With the highly motivated Detroit rapper Tee Grizzley, a recent collaborator, as the opener, this show should be a treat for rap fans who remember the 2000s.212-930-1940, playstationtheater.com
LISA LEBLANC at Mercury Lounge (March 7, 6:30 p.m.). This Canadian singer-songwriter, who was shortlisted for last year’s Polaris Music Prize, has a way with a wry aside: “Could you at least wait till I’ve had my coffee / Before you break up with me?” she asks on one bluesy highlight from her 2016 album, “Why You Wanna Leave, Runaway Queen?” She also does a memorable country-folk cover of Motörhead’s “Ace of Spades.”877-987-6487, mercuryeastpresents.com/mercurylounge
TIBET HOUSE U.S. BENEFIT CONCERT at Carnegie Hall (March 3, 7:30 p.m.). Tibet House U.S. has worked to preserve the cultural traditions of Tibet since the late 1980s, and in the past decade, it has become arguably even better known to music fans as the raison d’être for this annual fund-raising concert. Philip Glass and Patti Smith, both longtime supporters of the organization, return to this year’s lineup. The rest of the bill is packed with singer-songwriters, from Stephin Merritt (of the Magnetic Fields) and Carly Simon to Rhiannon Giddens, Dev Hynes and Angel Olsen, all of whom make music that’s well suited to Carnegie Hall’s sweet acoustics.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON
MARIA GRAND at the Jamaica Center for Arts and Learning (March 8, 8 p.m.). An engrossing young tenor saxophonist with a zesty attack and a solid tonal range, Ms. Grand performs as part of the Jazz Gallery’s itinerant presenting initiative, which brings a different young artist to the Jamaica Center once a month. Ms. Grand, who’s possessed of a free-ranging but firmly grounded improvisational language, appears here with a trio featuring Ben Tiberio on bass and Kush Abadey on drums.718-658-7400, jcal.org
FRED HERSCH, DREW GRESS AND BILLY HART at the Village Vanguard (March 6-11, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). These three expert musicians all boast a lightness of touch and a keen sense of suspenseful development. Mr. Hersch, a pianist, has played separately with the bassist Mr. Gress and the drummer Mr. Hart, but they haven’t performed as a trio in more than a decade. This week provides a chance to hear three elder musicians whose creative drive remains undiminished, exploring a fresh scenario.212-255-4037, villagevanguard.com
MIMI JONES at Lehman College (March 3, 7:30 p.m.). Ms. Jones vests her bass with hearty power; she often sings as well, adding a spirit of gentle reassurance. She’s an ambitious composer, too, writing music that mingles jazz with funk, rock and American folk influences. Here she presents “The Black Madonna,” a new series of compositions inspired by images of an African Mary. Her band includes Leonor Falcon on viola, Nir Felder on guitar and Darrian Douglas on drums.718-601-7399, bronxartsensemble.org
CHARLES MCPHERSON at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola (through March 4, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). In the 1960s, after the alto saxophonist Eric Dolphy departed from Charles Mingus’s band, Mr. McPherson stepped in. He stayed with Mingus through the mid-1970s, and his ardent, chirruping attack — heavily influenced by Charlie Parker and Sonny Stitt — became a defining component of the ensemble. In the years since, Mr. McPherson has hardly strayed from the path of bebop conservationism. He will perform in a stalwart quintet with the guitarist Yotam Silberstein, the pianist Jeb Patton, the bassist Todd Coolman and the drummer Jonathan Blake.212-258-9595, jazz.org/dizzys
BOBBY PREVITE at Roulette (March 2, 8 p.m.). Mr. Previte, a drummer, composed “Rhapsody” — a long-form suite, designed for an unorthodox instrumentation — with migration and intermingling in mind. The work, which bears the subtitle “Terminals Part II: In Transit,” unfolds with dizzying intensity and convulsing complexity, often employing abstraction to evoke the dislocation of travel. Mr. Previte just released the music on CD, MP3 and vinyl, and he performs it here with four of the five musicians who appear on the album. It’s a stalwart crew: the vocalist and multi-instrumentalist Jen Shyu, the guitarist Nels Cline, the pianist John Medeski and the harpist Zeena Parkins.917-267-0368, roulette.org
MIGUEL ZENÓN at Hunter College (March 3, 8 p.m.). Mr. Zenón, an acclaimed alto saxophonist and a MacArthur fellow, presents “En Pie de Lucha,” a new work dedicated to the struggle for self-determination in his homeland of Puerto Rico. He will play the lush, marching, almost bellicose piece in a concert benefiting victims of Hurricane Maria. Mr. Zenón will be joined by a 23-piece iteration of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Festival Jazz Ensemble, led by the conductor Fred Harris; the orchestra was planning to perform the work during a tour of Puerto Rico in January but had to postpone because of damage wrought by the storm.212-772-5020, music.hunter.cuny.edu
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO
BEN HARPER AND CHARLIE MUSSELWHITE at the Times Center (March 5, 7 p.m.). See a performance and conversation with these two award-winning artists, who have teamed up on “No Mercy in This Land,” which comes out on March 30. Their last collaboration, “Get Up!,” won a Grammy for best blues album in 2014. All of their New York City shows are sold out, so don’t miss this unique opportunity.timestalks.com
