‘Elektra’ Returns: The Week’s 8 Best Classical Music Moments on YouTube
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them on YouTube. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
Richard Strauss paints fierce, radiant starlight in a descending flash of strings as Elektra begins a simile about the “fiery light” that “pours down from the stars.” But as she finishes her comparison, the music darkens just as quickly: That starlight, she sings, will be like the “blood of a hundred throats” that will pour down on the grave of her father, Agamemnon, to avenge his murder. When I heard that split second of radiance deftly transformed into to a pained, foreboding cry for blood at a dress rehearsal a few days before “Elektra” opened on Thursday at the Metropolitan Opera, it felt a little like hearing the future. The orchestra was led by Yannick Nézet-Séguin, the Met’s next music director, and Elektra was sung by the dramatic soprano Christine Goerke, who will tackle Brünnhilde next season at the Met when the company brings back Wagner’s “Ring” cycle. MICHAEL COOPER
Read Anthony Tommasini’s review of “Elektra.”
Read about Mr. Nézet-Séguin’s recent 14-hour musical biathlon.
Read about how Ms. Goerke became a great dramatic soprano.
“Pan,” a genre-defying work with music by Marcos Balter that has its premiere this weekend at the Kitchen, stars the MacArthur-winning flutist Claire Chase in the title role. As I sat in rehearsals for the piece, which tells Pan’s mythical story with the help of community participants, I was often in awe of Ms. Chase’s energy. She was indefatigable as she played devilishly challenging music while acting, which often required dancelike movement. Her breathless performance shines in the opening scene, the death of Pan, a moment that calls for sounding the flute as she exhales, but also vocalizing on the inhale and speaking in an invented language. “I wanted to create something that would look exhausting,” Mr. Balter told me in an interview. Mission accomplished. JOSHUA BARONE 
Read more about “Pan” at the Kitchen.
I don’t think I’ve ever seen an audience disappointed by the rollicking finale of Prokofiev’s Seventh Piano Sonata, a go-to encore for many virtuosos. But it can sound very different depending on which tempo the pianist takes. Last fall, Denis Matseuv bulldozed through the toccata and demolished the piece’s rhythmic nuance in the process. By contrast, Yuja Wang — following a performance of Brahms’s Piano Concerto No. 1 with the New York Philharmonic this week — was a little slower, which brought out the bass line that gives Prokofiev’s music a rock ’n’ roll thrill. Ms. Wang’s interpretation was made all the richer by her delivery: technically mesmerizing but so quietly masterful, it was almost as if we were simply eavesdropping on her in a practice room. JOSHUA BARONE
Read Zachary Woolfe’s review of Yuja Wang with the New York Philharmonic. 
At Miller Theater on Thursday, the young Irish-born composer Ann Cleare discussed her drafting process during a post-intermission Q. and A. She said she often uses electronics while sketching a piece. Then, when collaborating with instrumentalists, she figures out how to produce those sounds acoustically. Ms. Cleare’s 2013 work “to another of that other” closed the concert and served as an exciting confirmation of how well her method works. Midway through Thursday’s performance, by the International Contemporary Ensemble, sustained-tone clouds mixed with breathy effects to create a hallucinatory impression. The suppleness of the live playing was clear — particularly during the trumpeter Peter Evans’s febrile exclamations — but lingering in the background was a mysterious haze suggestive of the electroacoustic tradition. An earlier performance of the piece, by the RTÉ National Symphony Orchestra, pulls off the same trick of sonic misdirection. SETH COLTER WALLS 
The Polish tenor Piotr Beczala is returning to the Metropolitan Opera this month for a revival of Verdi’s “Luisa Miller.” He’s a fine Verdi singer. But in 2016, at the urging of the conductor Christian Thielemann, Mr. Beczala took on the title role of Wagner’s “Lohengrin” in Dresden and demonstrated new vocal depths. Here he is in a video of that production performing “In fernem Land.” From the opening phrase he sings with honeyed tone, affecting dignity and plenty of carrying power. Stretching yourself like this as an artist can be important. At Carnegie Hall on Wednesday, however, Mr. Beczala claimed a birthright: songs by three Polish composers little-heard in New York, music he sang with virile sound and linguistic authority. I enjoyed four beguiling songs by Stanislaw Moniuszko, who came across as a sort of a Polish Schubert, and Karol Szymanowski’s “Six Songs,” music of searching harmonic richness and mystical allure. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Last weekend the New York Philharmonic presented some of the most beloved American music of the 20th century, including Samuel Barber’s Adagio for Strings. I felt guilty for how little the famously heart-rending music moved me, and I left wondering whether a large orchestra was the best way to convey the work’s power. The Adagio was, after all, originally written as the second movement of Barber’s String Quartet in B minor. This version of the score has the poignant economy of Beethoven’s late string quartets. The melodies are more earnest, and disarming in their intimacy. In this video by the Dover Quartet, the pleading cry of the cello — which is then passed around the violins and viola — takes on an urgency I didn’t hear from the huge Philharmonic. JOSHUA BARONE
When the modern early-music movement was still young, in the 1970s and ’80s, British groups tended to favor refinement and polish. Many have since roughed up the field, none more so than Red Priest (as Vivaldi was called), which trades on astonishing, all-out virtuosity on violin by Adam Summerhayes — including “beer-fiddling,” as he terms it — and on recorders by Piers Adams. Its program “The Gypsies in the Court,” at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Wednesday, offered, among other oddments, “The Jew’s Dance,” by the 17th-century English composer Richard Nicholson. Red Priest has also turned the piece into a little Beatles-style video, “Angela’s Dream” (named for its cellist, Angela East). The virtuosity sets in early, soon to be followed by the infectious dance tune. JAMES R. OESTREICH
Before Red Priest blew up the notion of genteel performance practice on Wednesday, Ars Longa de la Habana, a Cuban early-music group, shook it up on Tuesday evening, in a performance in St. Paul’s Chapel at Columbia University. The group performs with a sharp rhythmic drive, and its style often seems on the verge of dance, if not well beyond it. (The concert ended with audience members pulled into the final dance number.) The impulse to shimmy is strongly represented in a performance of Juan Gutiérrez de Padilla’s “Tambalagumba” in Ars Longa’s New York concert a year ago at Corpus Christi Church. JAMES R. OESTREICH
