13 Pop, Rock and Jazz Concerts to Check Out in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
CORNELIUS at Irving Plaza (March 9, 8 p.m.). In 1998, at the peak of his fame in the United States, the Japanese pop collagist Keigo Oyamada, who performs as Cornelius, came through New York on his first-ever world tour. (The visual approach was a striking one: “I dressed the whole band up like clones of me,” he told a reporter at the time.) He’s stayed busy in the intervening decades, but Mr. Oyamada hasn’t gotten around to playing here since January 2008. The long break ends with this show, part of a tour to promote his new album, “Mellow Waves.”800-745-3000, mercuryeastpresents.com/irvingplaza
GODSPEED YOU! BLACK EMPEROR at Brooklyn Steel (March 12-13, 8 p.m.). Sometimes they sound just like heaven, sometimes like an aggravating and inescapable hell. Either way, you can trust that’s exactly how the Montreal art-noise orchestra Godspeed You! Black Emperor want you to feel. On last year’s “Luciferian Towers,” Godspeed’s well-known commitment to political confrontation mostly surfaced in the track titles (for example, the three-part “Bosses Hang”). It’s one of their more straightforwardly beautiful releases, and it should make for a transporting live experience.888-929-7849, bowerypresents.com/brooklyn-steel
KRISTIN HERSH AND GRANT-LEE PHILLIPS at Rough Trade NYC (March 13, 8:30 p.m.). If you owned any Throwing Muses albums in the early 1990s, there’s a good chance you had one by Grant Lee Buffalo in your collection, too. The best songs written by those two alternative rock acts’ respective principals, Kristin Hersh and Grant-Lee Phillips, hold up well today. In addition to their on-and-off work with those bands, they’ve both pursued solo careers. Ms. Hersch also became a celebrated memoirist. They begin a two-week joint tour with this Brooklyn show.888-929-7849, roughtradenyc.com
I’M WITH HER at the Town Hall (March 15, 8 p.m.). This Americana supergroup — its three members are Sarah Jarosz, Aoife O’Donovan and Nickel Creek’s Sara Watkins, all well known to connoisseurs of simple acoustic instruments and sweet vocal harmonies — has performed regularly since forming in 2014, winning enthusiastic reviews along the way. I’m With Her will play this storied Midtown folk venue to celebrate the recent release of their full-length debut, “See You Around,” featuring the traveler’s lament “Overland.”800-745-3000, thetownhall.org
JUJU & JORDASH at Good Room (March 9, 10 p.m.). This Dutch-Israeli electronic duo is known for its heady, free-form live improvisations — they’re something like the Phish of techno music. No two Juju & Jordash shows are quite alike, but try listening to “Sis-Boom-Bah!,” the very mellow album they released in the fall, for a sense of where their inclinations may lie for this Brooklyn club night.718-349-2373, goodroombk.com
LOVE ROCKS NYC! at Beacon Theater (March 15, 8 p.m.). The impeccable cause supported by this all-star show is God’s Love We Deliver, the charity group that provides meals to ailing New Yorkers in need. And the lineup — Mavis Staples, Norah Jones, Emmylou Harris, Lucinda Williams, Gary Clark Jr., Steely Dan’s Donald Fagen and ZZ Top’s Billy Gibbons — is stellar as well. So, no, the tickets aren’t cheap (most remaining seats will cost you well north of $250, including fees), but all in all, they should be worth it.800-745-3000, loverocksnyc.com
O.M.D. at Terminal 5 (March 10, 8 p.m.). There was a time when Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark were revolutionaries: The perky synthesized melodies of “Electricity” and “Enola Gay,” both from 1980, were early indicators of the course that pop music would take that decade. Within a few years, similar sounds were everywhere, and the Liverpool group was making soundtracks for rom-coms. O.M.D.’s two core members, Andy McCluskey and Paul Humphrey, reunited in 2005 after an extended disunion, and they’re on tour to support their 2017 album, “The Punishment of Luxury.”888-929-7849, terminal5nyc.com
SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON
STEVEN BERNSTEIN at Jazz Standard (through March 11, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Depending on your perspective, the boisterous, kinetic attack of the trumpeter Steven Bernstein might remind you of New Orleans or Eastern Europe or Latin America. On Friday, he performs with Sexmob, the irreverent downtown quartet that has been making jumbled, devil-may-care music since 1996. That group is joined by a special guest: the pianist John Medeski. Then on Saturday and Sunday, Mr. Bernstein presents his Millennial Territory Orchestra, a rabble-rousing nine-piece that carbonizes jazz standards, originals and pop covers from the past 50 years of American music.212-576-2232, jazzstandard.com
AARON BURNETT AND THE BIG MACHINE at Roulette (March 14, 8 p.m.). There’s something oddly potent about Mr. Burnett’s tenor saxophone sound, a tightly channeled and searing thing that cuts a trench in your mind without giving you a whole lot of graspable melodic information. Is he completely in control of this strange sonic language, or is the instrument having its way with him? Mr. Burnett will present “New Spectrums in Electronic Acoustics,” a suite in which he will augment his saxophone with a range of electronic effects and processors. The work is meant as an interrogation into the relationship between ubiquitous technology, financial capital and human experience. His band, Big Machine, includes Carlos Homs on piano, Nick Jozwiak on bass and Kush Abadey on drums.917-267-0368, roulette.org
KURT ELLING at Birdland (March 14-17, 8:30 and 11 p.m.). With his earnest and elastic baritone, Mr. Elling is among the most highly regarded jazz crooners of the past quarter century. He’s about to release “The Questions,” a literary-minded album that collects songs from across the American canon. At various moments in the recording, Mr. Elling grafts the poetry of Rumi or Sara Teasdale onto modern jazz melodies by the likes of Carla Bley and Jaco Pastorius. He celebrates the album’s release with a four-night run featuring Marquis Hill on trumpet, Stu Mindeman on piano and Hammond B3, John McLean on guitar, Clark Sommers on bass and Jeff (Tain) Watts on drums.212-581-3080, birdlandjazz.com
LEDISI PRESENTS ‘NINA AND ME’ at the Apollo Theater (March 9, 8 p.m.). On her latest album, “Let Love Rule,” the vocalist Ledisi refuses to sit still. She moves from snakily grooving songs of uplift to romantic entreaties to reggae-tinged protest anthems. Altogether, the album seems to suggest a liberated neo-soul concept, constantly reimagining what a groove can feel like and how a voice can be woven into an ensemble sound. In the depth of her convictions and the proud intimacy of her reveal, Ledisi has some things in common with Nina Simone. At this concert, she will perform classics from Simone’s repertoire, as well as her own tunes. Her strong backing band includes the esteemed pianist and vocalist Patrice Rushen.212-531-5305, apollotheater.org
ARTURO O’FARRILL QUINTET at Minton’s Playhouse (March 15, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). The pianist Mr. O’Farrill is an irrepressible synthesizer and a conceptual long-distance runner. With his Afro-Latin Jazz Orchestra, he presents original works that tangle up Cuban folklore with modernism and experimental jazz. With smaller ensembles, his commanding pianism — equal parts Thelonious Monk, Chucho Valdés and Bill Evans — bursts to the fore. This concert is part of the Minton’s Jazz Legends Series, celebrating the 80th anniversary of the landmark club’s founding.212-243-2222, mintonsharlem.com
‘UPTOWN NIGHTS: MOTHERS OF THE MOVEMENTS’ at Harlem Stage (March 9, 7:30 p.m.). When his career was first taking flight, Marc Cary spent roughly a dozen years as the pianist in Abbey Lincoln’s band, internalizing the musical philosophy, poetics and loose rhythmic phrasing of that venerated vocalist and composer. Now almost 50, Mr. Cary has recently been embracing his own role as a mentor to some of New York’s brightest young improvisers. Here, he presents a reimagining of “We Insist! The Freedom Now Suite,” which Ms. Lincoln recorded in 1960 with the drummer Max Roach. Mr. Cary’s excellent band includes the drummer Terri Lyne Carrington and the bassist Reggie Workman. The concert is part of a series presented by Harlem Stage and the National Black Theater.212-281-9240, harlemstage.org
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO
