Controlled Madness: The Week’s Best Classical Music Moments on YouTube
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them on YouTube. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
The veteran bass Paul Plishka, who is retiring this weekend after 50 years at the Metropolitan Opera, told me he doesn’t have much use for recordings. “I’ve listened to all these great singers six feet away from me,” he said. “It’s hard to top that.” But now it is his recordings that will remain, and this 1980 video of Mr. Plishka singing “Ella giammai m’amò” from Verdi’s “Don Carlo” gives a sense of why the Met depended on him. In the aria’s heart-rending final moments, he veers from a soft, fragile falsetto to an anguished, booming bass — conjuring in an instant the pain, vulnerability and rage of the powerful King Philip as he realizes that his wife has never loved him. MICHAEL COOPER
Read our backstage interview with Mr. Plishka as he prepared for one of his last performances. 
I was all for the curdled edge of Jaap van Zweden’s take on Prokofiev’s Fifth Symphony last week with the New York Philharmonic; theirs was a vision of the work less redemptive or humane than sourly pessimistic. Even a seeming moment of respite from the grinding perpetual motion — rendered by Leonard Bernstein and the Philharmonic in this clip as a passage of calm majesty out of Beethoven’s Ninth — registered as faintly sneering, a parody of peace. ZACHARY WOOLFE
Read our review of the New York Philharmonic’s performance with Mr. van Zweden.
Mitsuko Uchida, a 69-year-old master of Schubert’s piano sonatas, performed six of them in two recitals at Carnegie Hall last week; I would have happily stayed for an entire cycle. (Don’t worry: She’ll be back for more, including the transcendent B-flat Sonata, next season.) She opened her first program with the C Minor (D. 958), whose second movement has the erratic, fearful madness that runs through much of Schubert’s late sonatas — though not at first. The Adagio’s beginning seems to have all the hallmarks of classical form, until the restatement of the theme is interrupted by a non sequitur of violent staccatos and fortissimo outbursts. Just as suddenly, the theme resumes in a delicate piano, which Ms. Uchida delivered with the sensitive control of a seasoned diva bringing Lucia’s mad scene to its quiet end. JOSHUA BARONE
Ms. Uchida may have been a bit under the weather last Friday at Carnegie Hall — she tucked a tissue into her Steinway and used it discreetly between movements — but that didn’t stop the flow of sonatas, with their storms, their reveries, their fleet-footed moments of light. Ms. Uchida, of course, is attuned to all of the moody Schubert’s moods, an expert navigator of the sonatas’ sudden changes of climate. My favorite shift comes in the Scherzo of the A Minor Sonata (D. 845), which begins with a galloping, pounding theme that gives way — the clouds part! — to a whole-note melody of disarming beauty. Ms. Uchida’s playing, plain-spoken and limpid, turns it into a kind of lullaby, the crossing of her hands like the gently rocking boat of a children’s rhyme. RACHEL SALTZ
Thinking about music history as unceasingly progressive doesn’t tell you much. That was my takeaway from the pianist Pierre-Laurent Aimard’s extraordinary recital at Carnegie Hall on Thursday. For the first half, lasting 50 minutes and played without break, Mr. Aimard began with stunningly avant-garde works (from 1915-16) by the overlooked Russian composer Nicolas Obukhov, then offered some searching late Liszt, followed by an ecstatic piece from Messiaen’s “Catalog of Birds,” before ending with Scriabin’s wildly mystical Fifth Piano Sonata (1907). After intermission, Mr. Aimard gave an exhilarating account of Beethoven’s still-audacious “Hammerklavier” Sonata. Five composers from different eras came across as fearless fellow radicals. In the summer of 2016 at the Aldeburgh Festival in England, Mr. Aimard, a Messiaen protégé, performed the composer’s complete “Catalog of Birds,” spread over an entire day and played in various intimate or outdoor settings. He started at 4 in the morning with “Black-Eared Wheatear” in a room overlooking a river. Listen to the opening, when the sound of live birds segues into Messiaen’s musical evocations. (Mr. Aimard is also an exciting Beethoven pianist: Just listen to his bracing performance of the “Emperor” Concerto from 2017.) ANTHONY TOMMASINI
The pianist Stephen Hough’s perceptive essay on Debussy, which appeared recently in The New York Times, got me thinking about different approaches to this seminal composer, who died 100 years ago this month. Painterly colors and milky textures are requisite, of course. But details matter in Debussy, and I have problems with pianists who, in the name of “impressionism,” are too slack with rhythm. So I was surprised by how much I loved this video of the extraordinary (and reclusive) Italian pianist Arturo Benedetti Michelangeli playing both books of “Images” in the 1960s. From the opening of the first piece, “Reflections on the Water,” Michelangeli is liberal in his use of rubato. But he makes it work. And the colors and shadings, the cool beauty, the sheer imagination of his playing are remarkable. Listen to the way, a couple minutes in, he draws out the demonic from below the watery surfaces of the music. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Read Mr. Hough’s essay on Debussy’s piano music.
In a recent program of little-known Haydn at the First Church of Christ, Scientist, Frederick Renz and his Early Music New York offered a Notturno in G, one of several works commissioned by Ferdinand IV, King of Naples, and featuring two “lire organizzate.” The lira organizzata, a sort of hurdy-gurdy with organ pipes, was the king’s “favorite obscure instrument,” according to the program notes, which added that “one hand turned a crank, the other played a keyboard.” Perhaps sensing correctly that the instrument would soon die out, Haydn made alternative versions of the lire works, in this case substituting flute and oboe. But lire can be heard in recordings, as in this account of a Haydn concerto, where the two instruments can be heard in all their dubious glory in an extended cadenza. JAMES R. OESTREICH 
The last time I saw the members of the percussion trio Tigue, they were playing tam-tam gongs very, very quietly in “The Four Pillars Appearing From the Resonating Discs” by Randy Gibson. Like Mr. Gibson, the members of this group — Matt Evans, Amy Garapic and Carson Moody — are attracted to the mystical, dreamlike states afforded by Minimalism. But the band’s forthcoming album of original compositions, “Strange Paradise,” also makes sure to thrash around a bit, too. The final minutes of the album’s closing number, “Quilts,” displays Tigue’s facility for balancing spacey modes and galvanizing beats. Over a modest, trance-like synthesizer motif, the percussionists collaborate on playful polyrhythms — and some impressive layers of tumult. SETH COLTER WALLS
