‘Così’ at the Met: The Week’s Best Classical Music Moments on YouTube
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them on YouTube. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
The opening on Thursday evening of Phelim McDermott’s staging of Mozart’s “Così Fan Tutte” at the Metropolitan Opera was in many senses more successful than I had feared. The fairground, 1950s Coney Island setting baffled me even as it lent some gorgeous imagery, not least Amanda Majeski’s Fiordiligi circling on a Ferris wheel for her great aria, “Per pietà.” But David Robertson’s conducting, the playing of the orchestra, and some of the singing at least gave the affair more of the depth and darkness that other Mozart productions at the house have lacked. For properly dignified Mozart, however — for Mozart which takes us beyond ourselves — we must go back a few decades, to Karl Böhm, the Vienna Philharmonic and the sainted Gundula Janowitz. DAVID ALLEN
Review: As James Levine Sues, the Met Opera Opens a New ‘Così’
From Coney Island Sideshows to an Operatic Debut at the Met
An Opera Diva and a Broadway Star Trade Places, and Advice
While saluting the young cast of the Met’s “Così,” I’ll join David in celebrating a recording of the opera from the past: an exquisitely urgent, blooming rendition of “È amore un ladroncello” by the mezzo-soprano Tatiana Troyanos. In the aria, inexplicably once a frequent target of cuts, Dorabella begs her sister to give herself over to love, even of the unfaithful variety. Troyanos — one of the great artists of opera history, who died in 1993, just 54, of cancer — makes it all rendingly persuasive. ZACHARY WOOLFE
Kelli O’Hara, the Tony-winning Broadway star, brought her lovely soprano voice, vibrant dramatic instincts and quite good Italian to the role of Despina, the sassy maid in “Così.” When she sings a rich musical theater score, Ms. O’Hara exudes the kind of vocal and verbal elegance that should be common in opera. Here she is singing “Almost Real” from Jason Robert Brown’s distinguished score for “The Bridges of Madison County,” during the 2014 sessions for the original cast recording. Listen to the way Ms. O’Hara, playing an Italian immigrant in rural Iowa lost in thoughts of Siena, lifts her voice effortlessly in phrases that crest on luminous high notes, while still making every word count. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
The gifted young tenor Ben Bliss is also appearing in “Così”; his sweet voice, youthful energy and touch of mischief suit the character of Ferrando. It must be fun for him to be working with Kelli O’Hara, since he has often sung musical theater songs in recital. In this video, taken during a performance in the crypt of a church in Harlem, Mr. Bliss shows classic Broadway style, including putting words across effectively, in “Maria” from “West Side Story.” Even in the climactic moment of the song, when he clings to a high note, Mr. Bliss sings with full-voiced intensity without sounding generically operatic. You’ll seldom hear a finer performance. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Yannick Nézet-Séguin and the Philadelphia Orchestra opened their Carnegie Hall program on Tuesday evening with the New York premiere of a scintillating work by the Dutch composer Michel van der Aa: his Violin Concerto of 2014, conceived for Janine Jansen. Mr. van der Aa, who typically delights in multimedia works steeped in theater, here confines the drama to the music itself, conceived around the magnetic personality of Ms. Jansen, who performed it on Tuesday. Rather than cast the orchestra as mere accompanist or equal combatant, Mr. van der Aa set up a synergy of near-constant interaction, as exemplified when Ms. Jansen’s line spawns tendrils in the orchestral strings, which make it, in the words of Paul Griffiths’s program note, “dribble away.” JAMES R. OESTREICH 
Review: Met Opera’s Next Maestro Energizes His Philadelphians
Mark Berry — who blogs, indelibly, as Boulezian — was kind enough to write for us about the grim life and grimly gorgeous music of Bernd Alois Zimmermann, who was born 100 years ago on March 20. His piece brought me to Zimmermann’s music for cello, an instrument with which he had clear affinity and affection, including this intense, melancholy solo sonata from 1960, played with lucid elegance by Thomas Demenga. I love in particular this strange two-string harmony, followed by a fragment of filigree passagework that’s almost Rococo. ZACHARY WOOLFE
A Composer of Dark Explosions Turns 100
The music of veteran New York School composer Christian Wolff has long been powered by unpredictable melodies and startling silences. Yet the lyrical quality of his writing often shines through, regardless of the overall oddity of his structures. “Going West” is a 2013 Wolff piece for solo electric guitar. Its premiere recording, released this week by Mode Records, shows that Mr. Wolff can still fashion passages of disarming beauty. Even after the short work has made a detour into the woods of complexity, the guitar lines — played here by Sergio Sorrentino — retain a songful style. The piece’s easygoing abstraction suggests a traveler setting up camp for the night, secure in a mood of peculiar solitude. SETH COLTER WALLS
Baroque composers now obscure keep turning up in the hotbed of early music that New York has lately become. Last Saturday at Corpus Christi Church, the Academy of Sacred Drama performed “Giuditta,” a small, attractive oratorio by Antonio Draghi (1634-1700), based on the biblical Book of Judith and recounting in a few simple strokes the heroine’s beheading of the tyrant Holofernes. Not a lot of Draghi’s music has found its way to YouTube, though there is a staged performance of a larger scenic oratorio, “La Vita Nella Morte” (“Life in Death”). Here is his Stabat Mater, which the Academy used as a striking exit processional last week, and much of the work’s musical charm survives through an indifferent performance in dismal acoustics. JAMES R. OESTREICH
