Review: Ligeti Sounded Thrilling, When Alarm Will Sound Was Let Loose
I was a skeptic regarding concerts that try to pull double duty as podcasts. But Friday’s show by Alarm Will Sound at Zankel Hall converted me to the explainer-format gig — at least partially.
It helps when the subject of the evening is a composer as fascinating as Gyorgy Ligeti. The late modernist’s enthusiasm for vertiginous, improbable structures resulted in a slew of masterpieces, including the opera “Le Grand Macabre” and works such as “Lux Aeterna” and “Atmospheres.” (The director Stanley Kubrick used the latter two pieces in his film “2001: A Space Odyssey.”)
It’s also a boon when the co-hosts of a show like this are performers on the level of the violist Nadia Sirota and the conductor Alan Pierson. In addition to Ms. Sirota’s hosting duties on the Peabody-winning “Meet the Composer” podcast, she collaborated with Mr. Pierson and Alarm Will Sound on a 2016 album devoted to works by Nico Muhly.
In 2017, Ms. Sirota, a contemporary music specialist, and Alarm Will Sound produced a “Meet the Composer” podcast-slash-album about John Adams, weaving together rigorous new performances and informed commentary. So by the time they brought their second such effort to a Zankel audience, everyone on stage seemed comfortable with one another, and with this still-new concept.
For nearly an hour and a half, Ms. Sirota moved nimbly between narrating aspects of Ligeti’s life story, introducing some prerecorded interview material that provided interesting additional context, and — at last! — playing her viola in the Alarm Will Sound string section.
Near the outset, the harpsichordist Steven Beck gave a vivid account of Ligeti’s compact, crazily dense “Continuum.” But it took about half an hour for the full ensemble to play a long-form piece by the composer: the five-movement 1988 Piano Concerto.
This performance was a marvel. In the first movement, Mr. Pierson made sure players articulated each madcap twist of rhythm not just with precision, but with a sense of glee. The way the bass and trombone savored droning tones in the second movement served as a reminder of what this group has learned from engaging with the Minimalist aesthetic. The soloist, John Orfe, sounded magnificent throughout, whether pummeling or delicately shaping Ligeti’s emotionally varied piano motifs.
All told, this made for approximately 25 minutes of the best live music I’ve heard so far this year. Which raises the question: Did it really need so much setup?
Most of the preplanned banter between Ms. Sirota and Mr. Pierson came off smoothly enough. And the sound effects that rolled underneath the narrative material were all tasteful — an important hurdle to clear, given that the topics included concentration camps, where some of Ligeti’s family members were killed. (He narrowly eluded the same fate.)
Yet when Mr. Pierson led the group in a brief excerpt of music, referred to during some radio-play aside, I often found that I wanted to hear more of each piece. Why not play all of Karlheinz Stockhausen’s “Kontra-Punkte”? Or more of Charlie Chaplin’s score to “Modern Times” (in the arrangement by Courtney Orlando)? The answer, presumably, is that then you’d only have time for a regular concert.
Classical performers and venues are well advised to be rethinking inherited strictures of the recital hall. Monastic seriousness isn’t the only way to take in a show. Lowering anxieties about what to wear and when to clap is all to the good. (There was some scattered, justly earned applause before Alarm Will Sound presented the final movement of Ligeti’s Chamber Concerto for 13 Instruments, which closed the concert. No one went mad.)
But neither is innovation where all the excitement is. The most persuasive advocacy on Friday night occurred when these players channeled their evident desire to connect into performances of notes on the page.
