What It’s Like to Hear the Desert in Music
The composer John Luther Adams won the Pulitzer Prize in 2014 for “Become Ocean,” a lushly tidal, terrifyingly immersive evocation of nature. “The music is not only a description of the sea — it behaves like it,” Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim wrote in The New York Times. The music submerged the listener “in a swirling, churning wash of sound.”
Its sequel, “Become Desert,” will be given its premiere on Thursday, March 29, by Ludovic Morlot and the Seattle Symphony, the orchestra that also commissioned “Become Ocean.” “Desert” features five different ensembles, moving at five different tempos and stationed around the audience. Voices sing a single word, “luz” (Spanish for “light”), inspired by a quotation from Octavio Paz: “Close your eyes and listen to the singing of the light.”
Here Mr. Adams gives a sense of what the experience of hearing “Become Desert” will be like. 
From the stillness around you a high glassy sound descends, like first light. Each new sound seems to breathe — emerging from and receding back into the stillness — and the glint of bells, like desert plants, here and there.
Almost imperceptibly the music swells and continues falling in pitch.
From somewhere above — like a gleam of metal, like sunlight emerging from behind a ridgeline — comes the sound of flutes.
You are in a strange landscape. You don’t know how to read the weather or the light. You are unsure how long you will be here, or how challenging the journey may be.
“This is beautiful,” you think. “But will anything ever happen?”
You resist. Yet the sound draws you in. You resolve to suspend your impatience, to listen as carefully as you can, as if watching a sunrise.
You notice your breathing becoming slower.
Falling, still falling. … You notice that the sounds are a little lower, a little darker now.
From behind you hear women’s voices. Chimes and bells seem to be pealing all around you.
You think, “This music is never going to change.”
Yet, as in a landscape, the longer you stay in this place, the more you notice change. And the more carefully you listen, the more you hear.
No two moments are exactly alike. This music is always changing.
You find yourself listening in ways you never have before. The scale of your perception has changed. Small, subtle sounds have become singular events. The space around you seems larger than you had realized.
You notice that the musical light has changed again. The sounds are even lower. You hear trombones and men’s voices. The harmonies are clearer, but much deeper. You feel a sound through your feet — bass drums and double basses, rumbling softly, like distant thunder.
The music has become night. Is it ending?
You wait.
The music does not diminish. Then you realize that it’s rising. Slowly yet inexorably, it has begun to ascend.
The tones of the violins sound like the first rays of a new day. Here are bells again.
The sound grows higher and brighter. The space around you seems to expand.
You ask yourself, “How long has it been?” And you realize you aren’t sure.
The sound continues to rise. The musical landscape seems to be renewing itself, like the desert after a winter rain.
You begin to feel that this music you had thought was suspended in time is slowly leading you somewhere, pulling you somewhere. It continues upward, rising with inevitable force, like the wind or the light.
The air around you feels lighter, more transparent. Here again are the clear tones of the flutes.
You sense the space closing around you. You feel it receding, and you’re not certain that you want to let it go. You are listening more deeply than ever.
As the music continues to rise and brighten, you begin to feel something like nostalgia — not nostalgia for the past, but nostalgia for the present, nostalgia for this moment and your presence within it.
You try to hold onto this feeling as it continues rising — dissipating like dust, or smoke, or the light.
You can almost see the sound now. All that remains are violins and the highest bells.
The music continues floating upward, growing more and more distant, until at last it dissolves into a deep and resonant stillness.
