6 Classical Music Concerts to See in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to the city’s best classical music and opera happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
BAYERISCHES STAATSORCHESTER at Carnegie Hall (March 28, 8 p.m.; March 29, 7 p.m.). Surely the highlight of this spring’s classical music schedule is this rare visit from the orchestra of the Bavarian State Opera, perhaps the world’s finest house. Its music director, Kirill Petrenko, soon off to the Berlin Philharmonic, leads both concerts, the first of which includes Brahms’s Double Concerto, with the soloists Julia Fischer and Daniel Müller-Schott, and Tchaikovsky’s “Manfred” Symphony. The second is still more appealing: a concert performance of Strauss’s “Der Rosenkavalier,” an opera that is impossible not to love. Adrianne Pieczonka is the Feldmarschallin, Angela Brower is Octavian, Hanna-Elisabeth Müller is Sophie and Peter Rose is Ochs.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
CHRISTOPHER CERRONE at Miller Theater (March 29, 8 p.m.). Mr. Cerrone is best known for “Invisible Cities,” a seductive opera that was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize. This program, another instance of Miller Theater’s invaluable Composer Portrait Series, offers a chance to hear newer works, including a premiere, “A Natural History of Vacant Lots.” Third Coast Percussion and the mezzo-soprano Rachel Calloway do the honors.212-854-7799, millertheatre.com
‘LUISA MILLER’ at the Metropolitan Opera (March 29, 7:30 p.m., through April 21). Whether wisely or otherwise, Plácido Domingo is still going. Mr. Domingo, now a baritone, adds yet another role to his performance history at the Met starting on Thursday night, accompanied by Sonya Yoncheva as Luisa and Piotr Beczala as Rodolfo. Elijah Moshinsky’s production dates from 2001 and is of the antique variety; the conductor is Bertrand de Billy.212-362-6000, metopera.org
ORPHEUS CHAMBER ORCHESTRA at Carnegie Hall (March 24, 7 p.m.). Lisa Batiashvili released a recording of Prokofiev last month with Deutsche Grammophon, and here is a chance to hear the violinist play the Violin Concerto No. 2. Before that, Shubert and Prokofiev are cleaverly melded, with Schubert’s Symphony No. 8 and an excerpt from his incidental music to “Rosamunde,” as well as Prokofiev’s “Schubert Waltzes,” in an arrangement by Paul Chihara.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
‘RINALDO’ at Carnegie Hall (March 25, 2 p.m.). A highlight of several recent Carnegie seasons has been the English Concert’s ongoing progress through operas and oratorios by Handel. This year, the time has come for “Rinaldo,” and with a strong cast. Iestyn Davies takes up the title role, alongside Luca Pisaroni as Argante, Jane Archibald as Armida, Joélle Harvey as Almirena and Sasha Cooke as Goffredo. Quality is assured.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
CHRISTIAN TETZLAFF at Alice Tully Hall (March 28, 7:30 p.m.). There is no violinist I would rather hear play Bach — well, anything, really — than Mr. Tetzlaff, who can be relied upon to rethink every last note of everything he plays. Here he declines to complete the works for solo violin, instead performing the second and third partitas and the second and third sonatas.212-721-6500, lincolncenter.org
