Scene-Stealing Tenor: The Week’s Best Classical Music Moments on YouTube
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them on YouTube. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
It’s become almost expected for the charismatic tenor Vittorio Grigolo to dominate any opera he appears in. It happened again on Thursday when the Metropolitan Opera brought back Donizetti’s “Lucia di Lammermoor.” The lovely soprano Olga Peretyatko-Mariotti had admirable qualities as Lucia, but Mr. Grigolo’s hotheaded, vocally burnished Edgardo is the reason to see this production. He usually manages to make an impact even in bizarre productions, as in this 2017 video from a strange, modern-dress staging of Verdi’s “Rigoletto” at the Paris National Opera. Here, as the duke, he sings “La donna è mobile.” Mr. Grigolo seems rattled at first: He and the orchestra take a phrase or two to get in sync. But once he takes off, Mr. Grigolo brings infectious swagger to the aria. When a roster of birdlike chorus girls enters the scene, he actually sings with more elegance. Catch the moment when he holds on to a melting high note as his silly companions shake their posteriors. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Read our review of “Lucia di Lammermoor.”
Composers have long provided soundtracks for the loves of characters from mythology, literature and history. But how would they score their own love music? I couldn’t help but think of a chef saving the best cut for himself when I heard this piece that the composer Jimmy López wrote for his own wedding — especially here, when lighthearted dance and pomp give way to the deep serenity of love. In this performance of the piece, “Man and Man,” at the wedding, that depth comes through when the pure-voiced countertenor Anthony Roth Costanzo sings the Nilo Cruz lyric: “Sooner than my eyes met your eyes, sooner than my knees met your knees, a star had promised to unite us.” MICHAEL COOPER
Read Mr. López and Mr. Cruz’s oratorio “Dreamer” and the meeting they had with undocumented immigrant students in California.
I recently sat in on rehearsals for the violinist Jennifer Koh’s program “Limitless,” a series of new duets she’ll perform with the composers this month at National Sawdust. She is a tireless champion of new music, but is also a nimble enough artist to hop among repertory staples and world premieres with stunning ease. Is there a better fit, then for Luciano Berio’s “Sequenza VIII” (1976), a work that speaks to both the adventurous spirit of 20th-century modernism and the violin’s rich history? See how, throughout this exhausting piece, she somehow offers new ways of looking at traditional violin gestures while Berio’s music nods to some of the most challenging music ever written for the instrument. And listen for the chords: flashes of Bach’s immortal Chaconne. JOSHUA BARONE
Now listen in as Ms. Koh works with three composers on new works for “Limitless.”
On Sunday, the superb countertenor Iestyn Davies sings the title role in a concert performance of Handel’s “Rinaldo” at Carnegie Hall, with the conductor Harry Bicket and the English Concert. After that ends around 5:30 p.m., Mr. Davies will dash to the Belasco Theater to appear in the final performance of “Farinelli and the King” on Broadway. As the “voice” of Farinelli, the legendary castrato, Mr. Davies appears onstage alongside the actor portraying the character. The regular Sunday matinee was shifted to the evening to accommodate Mr. Davies’s “Rinaldo” concert. If you can’t attend either performance, you can at stay home and watch him in a television broadcast of Thomas Adès’s opera “The Exterminating Angel” on PBS. To appreciate the depths of Mr. Davies’s artistry, I suggest this video of him singing the “Agnus Dei” from Bach’s Mass in B minor, with Mr. Bicket and the English Concert for a 2012 London Proms concert. I love the way Mr. Davies makes the sudden dips and rises of the vocal sound seamless and sadly eloquent. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
One of the more exotic concerts of the last week paired the elegant Chinese pipa player Wu Man with the rustic Huayin Shadow Puppet Band, made up of moonlighting farmers. In this clip from an earlier New York appearance by the band, you can’t miss the virtuoso bench-percussionist (there was apparently some problem getting his instrument past customs), but another star in the live performance was the trumpeter, repeatedly producing something between the whinny of a horse and the cry of an elephant. JAMES R. OESTREICH
There was very little Italian flair in my visit to La Scala in Milan last week: a South American star tenor (Juan Diego Flórez), a German composer (Gluck) and a French-language work (“Orphée et Eurydice”) imported from a British company (the Royal Opera). Not that I’m complaining; there was much to treasure about the evening, in particular Mr. Flórez’s dynamic performance as Orpheus. He dazzled, and even seemed to exhaust himself, in the coloratura-rich aria “L’espoir renait dans mon âme.” But, as you can see in this video from the Royal’s production in 2015, he also brought necessary restraint to the famous “J’ai perdu mon Eurydice.” Listen to his hushed pain as, after calling Eurydice’s name and begging for an answer, he quietly sings, “It’s your husband, your faithful husband.” JOSHUA BARONE
The extraordinary young contralto Avery Amereau continues to astonish with the richness of her voice and her control of it. And to judge from rehearsals this week, she will do so again in a concert with Thomas Crawford and the American Classical Orchestra at Alice Tully Hall on Saturday, when she sings Brahms’s “Alto Rhapsody,” a work seemingly tailor-made for her, if for few others. Here she sings an aria from Vivaldi’s “La Verità in Cimento” (“Truth on Trial”) in a concert with members of the Orchestra of St. Luke’s in January. Savor the fullness of tone when Ms. Amereau descends into that delectable lower register. JAMES R. OESTREICH
More Vivaldi. Any time the composer’s display of mad fiddling — “La Follia,” featuring dueling violinists — comes along, I sit up and take notice. Jeannette Sorrell and her Cleveland-based early music band, Apollo’s Fire, ended their fine program of Baroque gems at Zankel Hall on Thursday with Ms. Sorrell’s own expansion of the Vivaldi work for full string orchestra. It preserves intricate interplay between the two soloists in a number of places but generally shares the wealth of virtuosity and abandon with the group’s other gifted violinists to thrilling effect. JAMES R. OESTREICH
