6 Classical Music Concerts to See in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to the city’s best classical music and opera happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
CONTACT! at National Sawdust (April 2, 7:30 p.m.). Esa-Pekka Salonen is doing double duty at the New York Philharmonic this week, in his role as a valued guest conductor and as the orchestra’s composer in residence. First up, he hosts what may well be the last concert of the Contact! series, Alan Gilbert’s important yet ill-fated contemporary music endeavor. It had to be saved from oblivion once and will be retired under the new music director, Jaap van Zweden. This program looks at current Russian composers, including music by Nikolay Popov, Denis Khorov, Marina Khorkova, Dmitri Kourliandski and Alexander Khubeev.212-875-5656, nyphil.org
JENNIFER KOH at National Sawdust (March 31, 7 p.m.). “Limitless” is the latest of Ms. Koh’s pioneering commissioning projects, in which the violinist plays newly written duets with their composers, who have deliberately been chosen to present an inclusive vision of classical music’s present and future. On this second program of two, there is music by Lisa Bielawa, Vijay Iyer, Tyshawn Sorey, Nina Young and Du Yun.646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org
JUILLIARD ORCHESTRA at Carnegie Hall (April 2, 8 p.m.). David Robertson leads the superb young players of the famous conservatory’s leading ensemble in Dvorak’s Symphony No. 9, “From the New World”; Ives’s “Three Places in New England”; and Bartok’s Piano Concerto No. 3. The soloist is Tomer Gewirtzman.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
MATA FESTIVAL at the Church of the Epiphany (April 2, 7 p.m.). Now in its 20th iteration, this festival has done a great deal for young composers, as any glance through its alumni will testify. This year’s concerts kick off with a new focus on sacred music, featuring works by Shawn Jaeger, Lydia Winsor Brindamour, David M. Gordon and Nico Muhly, and performers including Miranda Cuckson and Blair McMillen.matafestival.org
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC at David Geffen Hall (April 4, 7:30 p.m., through April 6). Mr. Salonen conducts what is for him a relatively standard program among his other Philharmonic dates this week. The bulk is Beethoven: the “Eroica” Symphony and the Piano Concerto No. 3, with the sublime soloist Benjamin Grosvenor. Novelty comes with the premiere of Anna Thorvaldsdottir’s “Metacosmos,” a new work from a composer with a distinctive idiom.212-875-5656, nyphil.org
ANDRÁS SCHIFF at Carnegie Hall (April 3 and 5, 8 p.m.). Mr. Schiff’s pianism continues to divide opinion, and his two programs this week will likely do the same. They are resolutely narrow in their choice of composers, but somewhat unexpected in the way they are otherwise put together. On Tuesday, the proceedings begin with Mendelssohn’s Fantasia in F sharp minor, move on to Beethoven’s Sonata in F sharp, head through Brahms’s Op. 76 Piano Pieces and Op. 116 Fantasies, and end up at Bach’s English Suite No. 6. On Thursday, an even more circuitous route takes in Schumann’s “Variations on an Original Theme,” more late Brahms, a Mozart rondo, a Bach prelude and fugue, and, finally, perhaps with a hint of irony, Beethoven’s “Les Adieux” Sonata.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
