Review: An Ecstatic ‘Rosenkavalier’ Introduces a Conductor to Carnegie
It took only a couple of minutes of Strauss’s “Der Rosenkavalier” for the conductor Kirill Petrenko and the Bavarian State Orchestra to claim this score as their own on Thursday at Carnegie Hall. In the introduction to the opening act, the orchestra plays the rising, athletic motif of young Count Octavian, then the gentle, falling, noble theme of the Marschallin.
This introduction is like a compressed tone poem depicting their lovemaking. Many conductors pump the music for every bit of roiling, erotic excess.
Mr. Petrenko and his players conveyed the graphic passion in the music, but also its giddiness, humor and, most important, its intricacy. I’ve seldom heard the passage performed with more transparency and color. Right after some raucous horn blasts suggest Octavian in his moment of, ahem, climax, Mr. Petrenko followed Strauss’s instruction in the score to play “in strict time,” bringing exact rhythmic articulation to the series of syncopated chords. It made the ecstasy of the moment even more ecstatic.
This ensemble is the pit band of the Bavarian State Opera, where Mr. Petrenko has been music director since 2013. Right at the start of this concert performance it was clear that the audience was in experienced hands. This long opera has profoundly moving scenes, especially the great final trio for the three lead women, performed rapturously here. There are also stretches of galumphing humor that go on too long.
The triumph of this performance was that Mr. Petrenko shaped the beautiful passages with tenderness and slightly cool restraint, while also drawing out the complexities of the comedic episodes. Hearing an orchestra as excellent as this one play the music on Carnegie’s stage, instead of from a pit, certainly enhanced the clarity. But the mix of lucidity and nuance, of natural flow and urgency, surely came from complete trust between conductor and players.
Would the singers rise to the same heights? Absolutely, as was clear from the first morning-after exchanges between the lovers. The mezzo-soprano Angela Brower sang Octavian with plush, full sound, yet also youthful brightness and flashes of cocky energy. And the soprano Adrianne Pieczonka was an affecting and worldly Marschallin. During romantic moments she brought melting radiance to the music, but could also summon a weightier sound with just a glint of steel.
Late in Act I, when the Marschallin gently tells Octavian that sooner or later he will leave her for a younger woman, Ms. Pieczonka, in sync with Mr. Petrenko’s approach, sang wistfully, but never wallowed in sentimentality. Yet when Octavian leaves the room before she gives him a goodbye kiss, this Marschallin went into panic mode, sounding desperate. Mr. Petrenko drew out the frenzied, clashing intensity of the music. For a moment “Rosenkavalier” had echoes of “Elektra.”
The robust bass Peter Rose played Baron Ochs in the typical way, as an oafish character convinced that his aristocratic pedigree entitles him to act crudely. The young soprano Hanna-Elisabeth Müller was wonderful as Sophie, who is pledged to Ochs but falls in love with Octavian. There was rosy bloom but also coursing intensity in her singing.
On Wednesday, for the orchestra’s first program at Carnegie, Mr. Petrenko led a stirring account of Brahms’s Concerto for Violin and Cello, with the brilliant violinist Julia Fischer and the commanding cellist Daniel Müller-Schott as soloists. After intermission came Tchaikovsky’s “Manfred” Symphony, a nearly hourlong hybrid of symphony and tone poem. Mr. Petrenko found the coherence that lies below the teeming surface of this music. (A recording of the concert is archived on the website of the radio station WQXR.)
Given Mr. Petrenko’s stature — in 2019 he becomes the chief conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic, one of the classical world’s storied positions — it was incredible that this was his Carnegie Hall debut. It was long overdue.
