Abreu’s Legacy: The Best Classical Moments of the Week on YouTube
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them on YouTube. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
When he died last Saturday at 78, José Antonio Abreu was widely remembered as the founder of El Sistema, Venezuela’s system of free music education and youth orchestras — and as the mentor of the conductor Gustavo Dudamel, one of classical music’s most famous figures. His influence spread further through the proliferation of youth orchestras in underserved communities inspired by El Sistema. Here Mr. Dudamel leads one of them, the Youth Orchestra Los Angeles (known as YOLA), in a bit of Beethoven’s Ninth. Sure, older musicians might have more polish, but it would be hard to top the visceral excitement of watching this ensemble’s young timpanist beat his way into the boffo ending, live at the Hollywood Bowl. MICHAEL COOPER
Read our obituary of Mr. Abreu here.
Mr. Abreu’s legacy can also be seen on podiums around the world, where a number of young Venezuelan conductors who trained with him or El Sistema — besides Mr. Dudamel — are beginning to make their marks. Christian Vásquez, who learned violin as a child in San Sebastián de los Reyes, Venezuela, and studied conducting with Mr. Abreu, is now the chief conductor of the Stavanger Symphony Orchestra in Norway. Here he conjures wistfulness as the waltz theme returns in the third movement of Dvorak’s Symphony No. 8 — a dance tinged with regret. MICHAEL COOPER
There’s no regret in this dance. Rafael Payare, a graduate of El Sistema and a conducting student of Mr. Abreu’s, once played principal horn in El Sistema’s flagship ensemble, the Simón Bolívar Symphony Orchestra. He is now the music director of the Ulster Orchestra in Northern Ireland, and was recently named the next music director of the San Diego Symphony. When he led the Chicago Symphony Orchestra earlier this year in the Symphonic Dancers from Leonard Bernstein’s “West Side Story,” he took full advantage of the ensemble’s famous brass section to turbocharge the mambo. MICHAEL COOPER
Domingo Hindoyan, who grew up in Caracas and studied violin with El Sistema, has conducted frequently in Europe in recent years, including at the Berlin State Opera, and will soon become the principal guest conductor of the Polish National Radio Symphony Orchestra. He made his debut at the Metropolitan Opera this winter conducting Donizetti’s “L’Elisir d’Amore” — lending a vulnerable delicacy to this woodwind interlude in the overture. MICHAEL COOPER
Of the many things to admire about the Bavarian State Opera’s concert performance of Strauss’s “Der Rosenkavalier” on Thursday at Carnegie Hall, I was especially captivated by the surprising details Kirill Petrenko drew from the orchestra. His conducting brought out sophisticated comedy, as well as romance and heroism, that I didn’t even know existed in the score. Similar thoughtfulness is on display in this video of him leading the overture to Wagner’s “Tannhäuser” in a production by Romeo Castellucci that had its premiere last year in Munich. There’s a flash — just one measure — of revelatory madness in the theme from Tannhaüser’s song of love to Venus. The violas and cellos have a run of 16th notes full of accidentals that break free from the key signature. With heavy bowing and accents that rise above the rest of the orchestra, the measure suddenly colors the ecstatic passage with a touch of lunacy. JOSHUA BARONE
Read our review of the Bavarian State Orchestra.
Read our review of the “Tannhäuser.”
Many performers known for their artistry on a specific instrument have proficiency on a second one. But the violinist Julia Fischer, who played Brahms’s Double Concerto on Wednesday at Carnegie with Daniel Müller-Schott and the Bavarian State Orchestra, has much more than proficiency on the piano, her first instrument as a child. For a 2008 concert in Frankfurt with the Junge Deutsche Philharmonie, Ms. Fisher, having played Saint-Saens’s Violin Concerto No. 3, returned after intermission for a poetic and technically adept performance of the Grieg Piano Concerto. Listen to the moment in the first movement when she draws out the lyrical thread during a stretch of rustling passagework and then dispatches a burst of double octaves with crispness and ease. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
By its nature, the cello usually has a mellow, rich sound that some cellists can’t help exaggerating. Not Mr. Müller-Schott, who knows how to bask his instrument without going to excess. There was always something focused and refined about his playing during the Brahms concerto at Carnegie. His restraint comes through even in a piece where it’s hard to resist extremes: Max Bruch’s anguished and elegant “Kol Nidrei.” In this video he plays an arrangement for soloist and eight other cellos. During an agitated episode, backed by erupting tremolos, Mr. Müller-Schott’s intense expressivity is balanced by admirable clarity and directness. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
The violinist Christian Tetzlaff is a consummate Bachian, as he showed again on Wednesday evening at Alice Tully Hall, playing four of Bach’s six unaccompanied works for his instrument. But I first knew him as a brilliant young modernist, when he made his American debut in Schoenberg’s Violin Concerto with Christoph von Dohnanyi and the Cleveland Orchestra in 1988. He reverted to that mode last October, performing Gyorgy Ligeti’s quirky concerto with François-Xavier Roth and the Gürzenich Orchestra of Cologne. Here Mr. Tetzlaff’s unaccompanied playing comes near the end, in a blazing two-minute cadenza that shows virtually every aspect of his sensational technique. JAMES R. OESTREICH
