Indie Rap Veterans Return to a Genre Still in Need of Opposition
One of the most gratifying aspects of hip-hop’s relentless growth and expansion has been variety — the genre no longer has a true conceptual or geographic center, which means the rules are constantly up for debate and reinvention, and a host of unusual ideas manage to find a home under what’s become a big umbrella.
And yet that has been something of a setback for those making hip-hop indebted to the idiosyncracies of the mid-to-late 1990s hip-hop underground. In that era, that scene served as a quasi-moral counterweight — sometimes implicit, sometimes explicit — to the mainstream wing of the genre, just then arriving into the pop klieg lights. It was proposed as an alternative (even if there were more consonances than were openly discussed at the time), and was bolstered by being the opposition to something too grand.
As hip-hop’s growth steps have become more micro, though, truly resistant rap countermovements have been shunted even further to the fringes. It is perhaps tougher than ever to be truly outré. That makes a pair of impressive new albums by veterans of the 1990s underground even more refreshing.
“Moosebumps: An Exploration Into Modern Day Horripilation” is the proper follow-up, 22 years later, to the fantastically screwy Dr. Octagon debut album, “Dr. Octagonecologyst.” It restores the original lineup: Kool Keith, one of the great non sequitur rappers of all time (Dr. Octagon is one of his many aliases); the lavish producer Dan the Automator; and the turntablist innovator DJ Qbert.
Like some amalgam of science fiction fabulist and pornographer, Kool Keith — a 1980s innovator turned ’90s eccentric turned 2000s mystery — pinballs among topics, sentiments and scenes. His tone is amelodic, declarative and a touch absent-minded, as if starting fresh with each rhyme. A random sample of touchstones: Lynn Swann, Tyrannosaurus rex, laundry detergent, onion rings. He finds magic in the absurd and the minute. It is a style almost impossible to emulate.
That it sounds natural over Dan the Automator’s production is a real feat. He is a meticulous pastiche artist, playing with the lusciousness of 1970s orchestral soul, the boom-bap of late-80s and early-90s hip-hop, and the left-field ambience of library records and film scores. His drums and strings are intermingled with roars and squeaks and bleeps, all orderly and not cacophonous. Qbert, when given room, is ferocious, an aggressor who understands his place as part of the symphony.
As unconventional albums go, “Moosebumps” is surprisingly direct; its creators are steeped in hip-hop tradition, even if their lens on it is decidedly skewed. But there are also genre dissenters who play with structure, as heard on “Everything’s Fine,” by Jean Grae & Quelle Chris, a robust and in places odd album that takes on social numbness in a time of extreme political shock.
Ms. Grae was a member of the acclaimed mid-90s independent rap group Natural Resource and is, as ever, a blisteringly acute rapper. Quelle Chris is a fun conceptualist. (The two have deeply interwoven creative lives and recently got engaged.) Their rhythms can be jagged, but in simpatico ways, and the slightly off-tilt production has echoes of the plaint of the Native Tongues and early Outkast. Various comedians and rappers show up throughout the album — Nick Offerman, Hannibal Buress, Your Old Droog — to contribute quick narrative assists.
This is an album that takes familiar hip-hop starting points and denatures them, resulting in a compelling collage that feels structurally untethered to hip-hop then or now. The results alternate between tragic and comic, but the ambition is steadily high throughout.
These two albums are among a potent handful of recent works that carry forward some of the spirit of the ’90s underground in varying ways. You hear it in El-P’s grindcore-rap production for Run the Jewels, or the stream-of-consciousness storytelling of Open Mike Eagle, or in the fantastically clever complexities of Milo (a.k.a. Scallops Hotel). All together, they serve as reminders of the genre’s untapped flexibility, the paths few bother to explore.
