6 Classical Music Concerts to See in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to the city’s best classical music and opera happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
ROBIN BLAZE AND ELIZABETH KENNY at Weill Recital Hall (April 11, 7:30 p.m.). The idea behind this recital from a noted countertenor and a lutenist is simple: Shakespeare’s words, set to music, interspersed with readings from the playwright, given by the actor Simon Jones. Expect music by Purcell, Dowland and others.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
BOSTON SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA at Carnegie Hall (April 11-13, 8 p.m.). The Boston Symphony has been making marked strides under its music director Andris Nelsons, even if its programming seems a little aimless — as these concerts demonstrate. The big night is Thursday, which gives New York audiences a chance to hear the tenor Jonas Kaufmann sing Tristan for the first time, in a concert performance of Act II of Wagner’s “Tristan und Isolde.” He appears alongside Camilla Nylund as Isolde, Mihoko Fujimura as Brangäne and Georg Zeppenfeld as Marke. Wednesday’s concert is made up of two current obsessions for Nelsons and the orchestra: Shostakovich, represented by his Symphony No. 4, and Bernstein, with his Symphony No. 2. (Jean-Yves Thibaudet is the pianist.) And on April 13, there is a hefty Germanic outing: Mozart’s Symphony No. 23, a new “Partita” by Jörg Widmann and Strauss’s “Don Quixote,” with Yo-Yo Ma and Steven Ansell as soloists.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
‘CENDRILLON’ at the Metropolitan Opera (April 12, 8 p.m., through May 11). Short of new operas to present, the Met turns to 1899 for a premiere, with Massenet’s gloss on “Cinderella.” For Laurent Pelly’s production, at least, an impressive cast is on hand: Joyce DiDonato takes the title role, with Alice Coote as Prince Charming, Laurent Naouri as Pandolfe, Kathleen Kim as the Fairy Godmother and Stephanie Blythe as Madame de la Haltière. Bertrand de Billy conducts.212-362-6000, metopera.org
‘L’AMORE DEI TRE RE’ at the Rose Theater (April 12, 7:30 p.m., through April 15). New York City Opera is making a happy habit of presenting rarities, and this Italo Montemezzi opera from 1913, in high Romantic style, is no exception. Pacien Mazzagatti conducts a production by Michael Capasso, in which Raffaele Abete and Giuseppe Varano share the role of Avito, Philip Cokorinos sings Archibaldo, Joo Won Kang takes Manfredo, Daria Masiero is Fiora and Alex Richardson has Flaminio.212-721-6500, nycopera.com
PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA at Carnegie Hall (April 10, 8 p.m.). Opening with “Chichester Palms,” this concert provides an appetizer of Bernstein before the Boston Symphony arrives. There is also new choral music, with Tod Machover’s “Philadelphia Voices,” featuring a host of local choirs, and Mussorgsky’s “Pictures at an Exhibition” to round out the proceedings. Yannick Nézet-Séguin conducts.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
STILE ANTICO at Corpus Christi Church (April 8, 4 p.m.). It’s never a good idea to miss a concert from this British vocal ensemble: There are no finer singers of early music. Like their most recent recording, this program is devoted to the music of Tomás Luis de Victoria and his “Tenebrae Responsories.”212-666-9266, mb1800.org
