Mourning Cecil Taylor: The Week’s Best Classical Music Moments on YouTube
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them on YouTube. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
Assigning a lineage to Cecil Taylor’s style has long been a fraught enterprise. Before he helped to shape jazz’s avant-garde tradition, the pianist studied at the New England Conservatory. How much European classical modernism was in his aesthetic? Stray pointillistic gestures, born from a brilliance of touch, might suggest a connection to some early-20th-century mavericks. But the bluesy connotations of his feverish harmonic auroras remained unique.
Taylor loved to cite Duke Ellington. And in a spirited rush of poetic text that accompanied “Unit Structures,” his watershed 1966 album for the Blue Note label, he signaled a key break with mainstream classical tradition, courtesy of lines like: “Western notation blocks total absorption in the ‘action’ playing.” 
Yet by the time reports of his death began to circulate on Thursday evening, and as former collaborators started dedicating performances to his memory, it had long been apparent that Taylor’s dynamism had helped to shape the contemporary classical sphere. Exponents of the “New Complexity” school, like Michael Finnissy, were directly inspired by Taylor’s torrents of sound. And his influence is also there in the work of Tyshawn Sorey.
Unfortunately, Taylor’s pieces for improvising orchestra have not been recorded or distributed nearly as often as his piano solos and small-group performances. But the artifacts we do have are potent. In the early going of this clip, from a 2000 gig with the Italian Instabile Orchestra, it’s fascinating to hear how comfortable this most powerful of players is within a large ensemble’s sound. Even as increasingly complex actions flower from his piano, nearly a minute into the second movement his is still one voice within a blended (if riotous) entity. The way the entire group manages to dance through some of Mr. Taylor’s dense compositional designs is a wonder — and may yet prove an influence on more generations of experimenters, in multiple genres. SETH COLTER WALLS
Read the Times’s obituary for Taylor.
The Icelandic composer Anna Thorvaldsdottir was reluctant to answer when I asked her to choose her favorite page from “Metacosmos,” her new work that had its premiere on Wednesday with the New York Philharmonic. But she settled on a handful of measures that capture the spirit of the piece, which she described as inspired by “the ultimate power struggle” of passing through a black hole into the unknown. This moment comes early in the work, but listen for the friction already in play between the scale-like runs in the winds and the ebb and flow of glissando slides and tremolos in the strings. Chaos is brewing; Ms. Thorvaldsdottir has managed to create narrative tension in plotless abstraction. JOSHUA BARONE
Read about Ms. Thorvaldsdottir’s favorite page from “Metacosmos.”
Read our review of the Philharmonic’s concerts this week.
At 25, the British pianist Benjamin Grosvenor has already won attention, and a Decca recording contract, for his brilliant technique and scintillating style. On Wednesday at David Geffen Hall, Mr. Grosvenor displayed a musicianly side of his virtuosity, giving a crisp, lithe and bracing account of Beethoven’s Third Piano Concerto with Esa-Pekka Salonen and the New York Philharmonic. But here he is back in 2011, the summer he turned 19, showing off with a dazzling performance of some beefed-up arrangement of Brahms’s Hungarian Dance No. 5. Catch the passage a couple minutes in when he dispatches fleet passagework and head-spinning runs with utter ease and uncanny clarity. It’s such lot of fun, and yet he looks so serious. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Opera fans are eagerly awaiting the Boston Symphony Orchestra’s concert at Carnegie Hall this coming Thursday, when the tenor Jonas Kaufmann, an elusive presence in New York in recent years, takes part in a concert performance of Act II from Wagner’s “Tristan und Isolde.” Will Mr. Kaufmann be the Tristan the opera world has been waiting for? This is a trial run. But the program is also notable for the chance to hear the impressive Finnish soprano Camilla Nylund as Isolde. Though this exceptional artist has yet to sing at the Metropolitan Opera, she enjoys a major career in Europe. Here she is in 2015 performing “Im Abendrot,” the final of Strauss’s “Four Last Songs” with the Berlin Philharmonic. Alas, the fine video includes only a long excerpt from this world-weary song. Listen to the way Ms. Nylund’s warm, radiant voice gently breaks through the plush strings with her first poignant entrance. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Read our interview with Mr. Kaufmann, Ms. Nylund and Andris Nelsons about the “Tristan” love duet.
The weekend after seeing some high-production-value events surrounding the music of Karlheinz Stockhausen and John Luther Adams, I was in the mood for something a little less outwardly extravagant — but no less imaginative. A 16-minute performance by the sound artist and instrument maker John Driscoll fit the bill. His quartet’s presentation of an installation piece, “Speaking in Tongues,” was presented on Saturday, during a series that brought the Composers Inside Electronics collective back to The Kitchen (where its members also appeared in 1977). 
At first Mr. Driscoll’s homemade electronic instruments, outfitted with reflective foil, reminded me of the toylike implements used by the Fluxus art movement. But they soon revealed their unique character. The composer describes the act of playing these instruments as “a kind of sonic puppetry using ultrasonic feedback that is disturbed by small amounts of physical movement.” On Saturday, a dreamy sequence incorporated wobbly vibrato tones, whispery percussive flurries, and, eventually, some oscillating scales. It was difficult to tell which performer was producing which effect, but that was part of the gentle mystery. SETH COLTER WALLS
In a New York springtime, you can typically hear several top-flight performances of Bach Passions, more often the “St. Matthew” than the “St. John.” Last year was oddly unbalanced, with five major presentations of the “St. John” and none of the “St. Matthew.” This spring has been even more unusual, with just a couple of middling outings of the “St. Matthew.” Here is the crowning moment of the most memorable “St. John” of last year, by the vocal group Tenet and the period-instrument ensemble the Sebastians: the final chorus (before the concluding chorale), “Ruht wohl” (“Rest well”), a somber lullaby in Bach’s most touching consolatory manner. And take heart; Tenet and the Sebastians promise to return next March with the “St. Matthew.” JAMES R. OESTREICH
“Giovanna d’Arco” (1845) is no one’s favorite Verdi opera; it might not even rank on anyone’s top-10 list. So it was a case of bad opera performed well in Boston this week, when the ambitious company Odyssey Opera staged this early Verdi dud to conclude its season of Joan of Arc-theme works, including Norman Dello Joio’s “The Trial at Rouen” and Honegger’s “Jeanne d’Arc au Bûcher.” One chorus, though — “V’ha dunque un loco simile,” in the prologue — caught my attention because I suddenly felt like I was hearing “Macbeth,” a far superior opera that came only two years after “Giovanna.” For a brief allegro passage, the sotto voce chorus and trilling woodwinds are as spooky and evocative as the witches torment Macbeth. It made me wish I were hearing these engaging performers in that opera instead. JOSHUA BARONE
Steven Fox and his excellent Clarion Choir will perform Palestrina’s vaunted “Missa Papae Marcelli” on Friday evening in the Medieval Sculpture Hall of the Metropolitan Museum of Art. That would ordinarily be the end of the story, since the music is a cappella, but Mr. Fox has decided, according to advance publicity, to add a consort of sackbuts and cornetto, “as may have been done in the Renaissance” when the work was performed outside a church. Here, to give something of a glimpse of that side of the coin, is audio of an arrangement of the Kyrie from that Mass for modern brass instruments, performed by the Philharmonic Brass Zurich. JAMES R. OESTREICH
