Review: American Composers Orchestra Brings Jazz to Classical, Effortlessly
The American Composers Orchestra takes the concept of jazz-informed classical composition seriously. That may sound like an obvious strategy for an ensemble hoping to represent its native soil. Yet this healthy attitude is not terribly common.
In commissioning new works over the years by the saxophonist Steve Coleman or the pianist Vijay Iyer, the A.C.O. has bucked the historical trend of treating orchestrated works by sometime improvisers as mere curiosities. The orchestra’s Friday night show at Zankel Hall added to this legacy. More than half of the program was devoted to world premieres by composers with backgrounds in jazz performance. Two were by established stars: the saxophonist Steve Lehman and the pianist Ethan Iverson.
Mr. Lehman’s piece, “Ten Threshold Studies,” trafficked in some of the hallucinogenic mystery of the small groups he has led. In his score, the composer instructs an oboist to switch between different fingerings, on the same pitch, producing notes “nearly identical in tuning” while remaining “extremely timbrally distinct.”
As a player, Mr. Lehman has few peers when it comes making severe changes of attack feel fluid. In the hands of the orchestra, these effects sounded more labored during the early going on Friday. But as the piece morphed from leaden, hard-struck percussive passages to a sense of weightless drift, carried by resonant vibraphone chords, the conductor George Manahan and his orchestra gradually realized Mr. Lehman’s interest in mystic change.
“Concerto to Scale,” a three-movement work by Mr. Iverson, was a world away in texture: It was studded with familiar scales and ragtime riffs that were designed to take advantage of Mr. Iverson’s vivid presence as soloist, alongside the orchestra. Yet, as with Mr. Lehman’s work, “Scale” also managed to connect with some of its composer’s prior efforts in jazz clubs.
Its referentiality recalled a winking approach to pop-music covers that Mr. Iverson has helped perfect, in different ensembles. And his punchy piano part — often shadowed by a thumping bass drum — drew from the same playfully complex style as some of his pieces for the Bad Plus (a trio he worked in for nearly two decades, before exiting last year).
He also took advantage of the vintage reference points to work as a vaudevillian. At one point, Mr. Iverson allowed a theatrical sweep of the piano’s highest register to carry him up from his bench, where he then regarded the audience and waited for a laugh. (He got one.) Thankfully the piece wasn’t all jokey: A middle movement meant to reflect a “19th-century nocturne atmosphere” had a genuinely personal approach that rivaled the more boisterous movements as entertainment.
During the premiere of the newly revised “September Coming,” by the young saxophonist Hitomi Oba, the orchestra did not sound as successfully attuned to the composer’s sensibility. This new piece had some of the same dramatic spacings and crisply distinguished layers as another recent work, “With Bare Feet,” though here the impact was smudged by some tentative-sounding entrances. Still, the piece advertised enough invention to recommend a repeat hearing.
More persuasive was the orchestra’s presentation of two works that, while not premieres, carried a sense of novelty. The 1990 essay “Bahia, Bahia” came from T. J. Anderson, a veteran educator who also produced an important orchestration of Scott Joplin’s “Treemonisha.” The episodic nature of this particular narrative occasionally seemed thin on development, though the orchestra navigated the twists confidently.
And its way of handling Clarice Assad’s 2009 “Dreamscapes,” alongside the violin soloist Elena Urioste, proved riveting. In a program note, the composer said she was inspired by research into REM states, but the work didn’t sound weighed down by any clinical investigation.
Most satisfying of all was the easygoing way that the concert moved between these styles. Since no one piece had to stand alone as the “jazz-inspired” work, the anxiety that can often be felt around this sort of programming was lessened. Simple enough, seemingly. But somehow still too difficult for most orchestras to attempt.
