Wye Oak Delves Inward and Opens Up on ‘The Louder I Call, the Faster It Runs’
“I search for patterns/sense that isn’t there,” Jenn Wasner sings in the irresistible title song of Wye Oak’s new album, “The Louder I Call, the Faster It Runs.” The latest songs she has written with Andy Stack, the group’s other member, are brimming with patterns: synthesizer lines that loop and pulse, circling guitar runs, brisk programmed drumbeats. The patterns interlock and stack up to grow dense and bustling, confident and luminous — the sound of a band simultaneously delving deeper into its music and opening it up.
Yet at the same time, the album title suggests how art defies intention. And all of the music’s patterned, orderly activity — all that control — doesn’t resolve the tangled inquiries that have filled Wye Oak’s songs since its debut album, “If Children,” in 2007.
As its musical vocabulary has steadily expanded, Wye Oak has long pondered how the personal turns metaphysical. Its songs grapple with questions of higher purpose, of personal and philosophical trust, of fate and self-determination, of belief and responsibility, and of connection and solitude. They can be cryptic, but the songs measure themselves against everyday experience.
On the new album, a bumpy flight home is the starting point of “Say Hello.” It places a stately melody above a nervously undulating mass of buzzing guitar tones and drumming that goes against the beat, while Ms. Wasner reflects on the inexorable passage of time, on the nature of truth and on endless human yearning. “There is no distance long enough/but still the lengths to which we go,” she sings.
Ms. Wasner’s voice and melodic sense, along with her perpetual self-examination, have always been the core of Wye Oak. Her tone is pensive and centered, smooth and resolute; it warms and sustains tunes that often leap at unexpected angles. She and Mr. Stack devise music that is as much counterpoint as accompaniment, an active participant in the songs’ internal dialogues. On the new album, the music marks both an expansion and a restoration.
Wye Oak got started as a guitar-centered indie-rock band, usually deploying Ms. Wasner on guitar and lead vocals while Mr. Stack handled drums and keyboards. Then, with its 2014 album, “Shriek,” Wye Oak willfully transformed its sound, nearly eliminating guitar to construct songs from keyboards and the rhythm section; Ms. Wasner moved primarily to bass, summoning both its architectural and propulsive functions. Suddenly, Wye Oak was showing connections to both electronic pop and progressive rock.
Still, Wye Oak hadn’t abandoned guitar. “Tween,” a 2016 collection of eight outtakes recorded from 2011-14, revealed paths the band had rejected for “Shriek,” with songs that enfolded electronics in broad strokes of guitar. Now, with “The Louder I Call, the Faster It Runs,” Wye Oak extends that approach to make it nimbler, more intricate and welcoming. There are joyful and sometimes rowdy sonic crosscurrents, even as the lyrics determinedly think things through.
In “The Instrument,” the singer confronts someone who has taken her for granted: “The instrument you once ignored/It is moving of its own accord,” she warns. But the track has its own mandate, and it’s too kinetic to sulk; behind Ms. Wasner’s voice, a fast odd-meter (7/4) beat and a racing synthesizer loop are poked and teased by electric guitar and a wavery synthesizer countermelody. The lyrics of “Over and Over” recognize being stuck in a toxic relationship — “break out or watch as it repeats itself,” Ms. Wasner sings — but until the music dissolves at the end, it’s a raucous, upbeat foot-stomper. “Symmetry” is more ominous, envisioning natural and interpersonal disasters just ahead — “My whole life is in that space/After the cut, before the pain” — yet fighting back with airy vocal harmonies and odd-meter drive.
It’s an acutely self-conscious album, in form — there are two distinct halves, separated by “My Signal,” a brief, Björk-tinged song that has Ms. Wasner accompanied only by a string ensemble — and in its concerns. In “You of All People,” Ms. Wasner worries about listeners who might “confuse the artist with their work,” while she prefers to “look up at something larger than myself.” In “Lifer,” she considers a life that has been spent making music, teetering between gratitude for her luck and a persistent insecurity — though right after she sings, “I believe that life could be better,” she unleashes a brash, distorted guitar solo.
Laced through multiple songs are worries about growing older and less adventurous, about being either too selfish or too accommodating, and about the inconstancy of inspiration. But the music refutes all that. The patterns dazzle, the melodies sail grandly atop them and there’s enough noise at the edges to keep things human. Wye Oak can be as self-critical as it wants, but its songs are indisputable.
