Schubert’s Sonatas, and a Pianist, Come Into Their Own
The pianist Shai Wosner might be tempted to relive a formative childhood experience this weekend as the New York Philharmonic plays along to screenings of “Amadeus.” As a boy of 8 or so in Israel, he was captivated by that 1984 film about Mozart, seeing it three times in the movie theater in quick succession.
“I actually forgot it was a movie,” Mr. Wosner, now 41, recalled recently in his studio on the Upper West Side, “and I started clapping. I thought I was in 18th-century Vienna, watching the opera. I still remember the moment when people turned back to see who was clapping in the middle of the movie, and I actually didn’t care that everyone was staring at me.”
His interests at the moment date from just a few decades later than Mozart’s time. Schubert’s piano sonatas, once largely neglected, have come into their own over the last generation or two. It has become almost commonplace for master pianists to present the three great sonatas (in C minor, A and B flat) of 1828, the composer’s final year, in a single evening, as Mr. Wosner himself has done of late.
On Friday evening, he opens a three-concert survey of these final piano sonatas in the intimate Buttenwieser Hall at the 92nd Street Y. He will add slightly earlier ones (in A minor, D and G), to be interleaved over the three evenings — the series continues on May 4 and 11 — citing evidence that Schubert intended each of the two sets as a trilogy.
The first time I heard Mr. Wosner play, at the Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival in 2013, I had something of an out-of-body sensation of my own. Then, too, he played mostly Schubert, and, to my unreliable eyesight, utterly looked the part, with his fine-rimmed glasses and curly hair (though Schubert was by all accounts shorter and pudgier).
Just as Mr. Wosner had when he was a child, I could almost convince myself that I had gone back in time, to some 19th-century salon, observing the composer himself. And the authority and proprietary command of Mr. Wosner’s playing only enhanced the illusion. I had to wonder whether Mr. Wosner was perhaps cultivating such a look.
“No,” he said recently. “I got these glasses on sale on 72nd Street years ago, without any agenda in mind. I forgot I had them for a long time, and then the other pair broke.”
Mr. Wosner grew up in Moshav Batzra, near Raanana, which he described as “essentially a suburb of a suburb of Tel Aviv.” As a child, he toyed with the family piano, which otherwise lay idle.
After the “Amadeus” experience and his contemporaneous discovery of Mozart’s Requiem, his parents encouraged him to learn to read music, and he began to delve more deeply into works of all shapes and sizes: symphonic, operatic and choral, as well as pianistic and vocal.
Pretty much out of the blue, Mr. Wosner’s older sister bought him a recording of Mahler’s Fifth Symphony.
“I couldn’t stop listening to that,” he said. “It was obsessive. And I went through one after the other like that, all nine symphonies. Not until years later did I realize that Mahler really comes from Schubert.”
At 18, Mr. Wosner came to New York to study at the Juilliard School and specifically with Emanuel Ax, who takes on very few students.
“He was a real mentor, not just a teacher,” Mr. Wosner said. “Coming to America was quite a cultural shift, and he taught me everything from technical skills all the way to what the world is like.”
Mr. Ax, for his part, said: “He could do everything on his own. I couldn’t teach. We just talked, and I would say, ‘We could try this.’ He’s so smart, very modest and realistic about life.”
Mr. Wosner took up Schubert’s sonatas only about 10 years ago.
“Schubert was like a bedrock,” he said. “The first to describe certain emotions, certain parts of human existence. And he was the best to describe them: emotions like self-doubt and alienation from society.”
He leapt to the piano to play an example from the jaunty marchlike slow movement of Schubert’s Ninth Symphony, where a shift of a single note, from E to F, in a rich chord that could otherwise have been innocuous, “pulls the rug out,” Mr. Wosner said. “It colors it in this pale and angst-ridden way, and it makes your heart sink.”
“Yet despite the dark streak in Schubert’s late pieces,” he added, “amazingly, the overall feel of the music is not depressing but uplifting. For all the outbursts of melancholy, anguish and even violent pain, precious moments of consolation and the most touching sense of hope almost always follow, often through little gestures: those gentle, understated shifts to the major key, that unexpected turn of phrase that makes you feel sunshine inside.”
And what of the vaunted “heavenly lengths” in late Schubert (“late,” always recognizing that Schubert died at just 31), which, contrariwise, some tend to find infernal?
“Schubert too long?” Mr. Wosner asks. “It’s like saying that Rembrandt’s paintings are too large. Schubert is not so much about reaching from point A to point B, like Beethoven is. The twists and turns interest him more than some sort of goal. The music tends to get in a certain groove that wants to go on forever. If you don’t get into the timelessness of its pace, you’re missing a very special thing about Schubert. You’re kind of missing the point, I think.”
