14 Pop, Rock and Jazz Concerts to Check Out in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
JOEY BADASS at Terminal 5 (April 19, 8 p.m.). Joey Badass arrived on the scene in 2012 sounding like a time traveler: Still in his teens, he upheld the rules and traditions of East Coast hip-hop from the 1990s with uncommon tenacity. He made a good purist, but watching him expand his world outward on the politically incisive album “All-AmeriKKKan Badass,” from last year, and his recurring TV role on “Mr. Robot” has been rewarding. The Brooklyn-born rapper, now 23, comes home to headline this large Manhattan venue on Thursday night.888-929-7849, terminal5nyc.com
FRANZ FERDINAND at Brooklyn Steel (April 15-16, 8 p.m.). In the years since their excellent 2004 debut helped make dance rock a buzzword for an era, these Scots have steadily increased the dance half of their equation. They edge closer than ever to disco with the late-night grooves of “Always Ascending,” Franz Ferdinand’s fifth album and the first since the departure of their founding guitarist, Nick McCarthy. It’s not “Take Me Out,” but it’s fun.888-929-7849, bowerypresents.com/brooklyn-steel
HURRAY FOR THE RIFF RAFF AND WAXAHATCHEE at Warsaw (April 13, 8 p.m.). This show in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, brings together two songwriters with vivid voices: The Bronx native Alynda Segarra leads Hurray for the Riff Raff, who released an expansive folk-rock concept album last year, and Katie Crutchfield creates instrumentally stormy, emotionally precise rock with Waxahatchee. Bedouine, a gifted acoustic storyteller who made her debut last year, will open.866-777-8932, warsawconcerts.com
MUSIC AGAINST MASS INCARCERATION II at Trans-Pecos (April 14, 2 p.m.). A solo performance by the singer and guitarist Andrew Savage, who’s preparing to release a new album this spring with his post-punk band, Parquet Courts, is the main attraction at this all-day benefit concert in Ridgewood, Queens. Proceeds will go to Just Leadership USA, an activist group that aims to halve the prison population in the United States over the next 12 years.877-987-6487, thetranspecos.com
PARTNER at the Silent Barn (April 13, 8 p.m.). If your Venn diagram of interests includes Weezer’s first three albums, stoner humor à la “The Big Lebowski” and any kind of Canadian popular culture, drop everything and listen to Partner’s full-length debut, “In Search of Lost Time.” If you’re into only two of those things, or even just one, you should probably check it out anyway. The absurdly entertaining, proudly queer Ontario duo, comprising the singers and guitarists Josée Caron and Lucy Niles, is among the final acts booked at the Silent Barn, the D.I.Y. venue in Bushwick, Brooklyn, that is closing at the end of the month.877-987-6487, silentbarn.org
SABA at Highline Ballroom (April 13, 8 p.m.). Many listeners outside his Chicago hometown first encountered Saba on the hook of Chance the Rapper’s ebullient 2015 single “Angels.” But he’s much more than anyone’s sidekick: Saba’s solo debut, “Bucket List Project,” was one of 2016’s strongest rap releases, revealing his multifaceted virtuosity. His second album, “Care for Me,” arrived this month, and it’s a bittersweet, subtle listen, highly recommended for fans of introspective hip-hop.212-414-5994, highlineballroom.com
SPRING PERFORMANCE FESTIVAL at MoMA PS1 (April 15, noon). The Museum of Modern Art’s Queens branch is celebrating spring with this free six-hour avant-garde extravaganza. In addition to an array of video, performance art and improvisational theater pieces, there will be a number of musical acts, selected with help from the Brooklyn venue Secret Project Robot. They include the New Age healer and sometime wedding officiator Bunny Michael; Jennifer Vanilla, an unsettling character performed by Becca Kauffman of the indie-rock band Ava Luna; and, most excitingly, the beloved experimental music group Black Dice, who are giving their first New York performance in five years.718-784-2084, momaps1.org
SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON
RON CARTER BIG BAND at the Blue Note (through April 15, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Carter, one of the most recorded and widely respected jazz musicians, is known for his slippery, free-ranging bass playing and tireless precision. A National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master, he’s always stoked ambitions as a bandleader, too, and they’re borne out with particular splendor in his big band. At this run, Mr. Carter pays tribute to Michel Legrand, the jazz-influenced French film-score composer. Mr. Legrand was scheduled to perform at the Blue Note this week but was unable because of illness.212-475-8592, bluenote.net
CAROLINE DAVIS at the Jazz Gallery (April 13, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Ms. Davis, an alto saxophonist, arrived in New York a few years ago by way of Chicago, and last month she released her third album, “Heart Tonic,” an impressive collection of twisty, chattering originals performed by a spry quintet. Ms. Davis will play music from that disc here with the rhythm section from that band — Julian Shore on piano, Tamir Shmerling on bass and Jay Sawyer on drums — as well as Noah Preminger on tenor saxophone.646-494-3625, jazzgallery.nyc
FESTIVAL OF MALI at Brooklyn Bowl (April 14-16, 8 p.m.). The offerings at this three-night festival provide a cross sample of the country’s music — from the kinetic churn of the Songhaï vocalist and guitarist Sidi Touré on Saturday to the gentler admonishments of the griot supergroup Trio Da Kali on Sunday. The series closes on Monday with Fatoumata Diawara, a beguiling talent on vocals and guitar whose music splits the difference between the other two headliners while admitting folk influences from around the world.brooklynbowl.com
TERRACE MARTIN AND FRIENDS at National Sawdust (April 13, 8 p.m.). Mr. Martin has no problem weaving a contemporary Angeleno sound out of the common thread that already runs through 1970s jazz-funk and 1990s G-funk. An enterprising multi-instrumentalist, he primarily plays the saxophone; his signature sound is a high, zigzagging squeal. But Mr. Martin has also become one of Los Angeles’s most sought-after producers, working with Herbie Hancock, Kendrick Lamar and a growing list of other pop and hip-hop stars. It’s less common for him to lead his own band, let alone in New York. Catch him here at the helm of a talented group featuring James Francies on keyboards, James Genus on bass and Marcus Gilmore on drums.646-779-8455, nationalsawdust.org
CHRISTIAN MCBRIDE’S NEW JAWN at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola (through April 15, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. McBride has more clean, fastidious power than almost any other bassist around — it makes him a kind of dream sideman. But most of his creative energy these days gets spent on his own ensembles, and the most recent of them is a big winner. The New Jawn quartet has a roguish, brawny sound, sprung from the earthy drumming of Nasheet Waits and the sharp-elbowed horn playing of Josh Evans on trumpet and J. D. Allen on tenor saxophone (on previous engagements, the saxophonist has been Marcus Strickland).212-258-9595, jazz.org/dizzys
PHAROAH SANDERS at Le Poisson Rouge (April 19, 8 p.m.). A doyen of spiritual jazz, Mr. Sanders is known for his mantralike compositions, often featuring no more than two chords and a repetitious theme. They tend to open onto acres of space where the tenor saxophonist can improvise and conjure. At 77, Mr. Sanders — an N.E.A. Jazz Master — still performs with ardor, often singing as well as blowing the horn. And on jazz standards he can still channel the beaming, late-1950s sound of his mentor, John Coltrane.212-505-3474, lpr.com
SFJAZZ COLLECTIVE at Jazz Standard (through April 15, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Since its founding in 2004, this rotating all-star band has focused on the catalog of a different modern composer every year, interrogating and rearranging their tunes. But the current season is about taking stock of the collective’s own book — by now quite an overstuffed volume. On Friday, the group will release a double-disc collection featuring originals by its members, as well as new takes on arrangements from past seasons. At Jazz Standard, the group will play some of those originals, as well as its versions of pieces by Miles Davis, the collective’s 2016 honoree. The group’s current lineup features the tenor saxophonist David Sánchez, the trumpeter Sean Jones, the vibraphonist Warren Wolf, the alto saxophonist Miguel Zenón, the trombonist Robin Eubanks, the pianist Edward Simon, the bassist Matt Penman and the drummer Obed Calvaire.212-576-2232, jazzstandard.com
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO
