Nervous Dirge: The Best Classical Music Moments of the Week
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them over the past week. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
New York City Opera’s production of Montemezzi’s rarely heard “L’Amore Dei Tre Re,” playing through Sunday, didn’t make me think of the piece as an unjustly neglected corner of the repertoire. The way the work lunges after a Wagnerian grandeur it can’t quite grasp is alternately charming and trying. Yet there are some tragic extravagances for performers to savor. Most interesting, in this cast, is the veteran bass Philip Cokorinos, who on Thursday sang the role of the blind potentate Archibaldo with apoplectic intensity. The blitzing narrative asks that some sharp emotional turns be taken with alacrity; Mr. Cokorinos often made the quick escalations seem natural. He’s offered that same smoothness elsewhere, as in the comic performance he offered in Los Angeles Opera’s recent staging of John Corigliano’s “The Ghosts of Versailles.” SETH COLTER WALLS
Few concert halls are more serene, pristine, light and elegant than the airy white one Jean Nouvel designed for the Lucerne Festival in Switzerland. So it must have been a bit of a shock for the audience assembled there for the 2015 premiere of Tod Machover’s “A Symphony for Lucerne” when the conductor Matthias Pintscher turned his back on the orchestra and began conducting a rollicking marching band that had crashed the symphony. It was the Barfuessfäger, one of the papier-mâché-masked bands that usually plays during the city’s annual carnival, Fasnacht, a chaotic counterpoint to all that Swiss precision. The collision of marching band and Lucerne Festival Academy Orchestra surely would have pleased Charles Ives, who explored clashing marching bands in his works, and fit in with Mr. Machover’s mission of writing symphonies that capture the sound and spirit of cities. 
Read about Mr. Machover’s newest city symphony, “Philadelphia Voices,” and how it brought the sizzle of a Philly cheesesteak to Carnegie Hall.
“Philadelphia Voices,” Tod Machover’s new work for chorus and orchestra, incorporates the sounds of Philadelphians speaking, urban bustle and sizzling cheesesteaks into a 30-minute score. For the New York premiere of the piece on Tuesday at Carnegie Hall, the Philadelphia Orchestra was joined by the Keystone State Boychoir, the Pennsylvania Girlchoir and the Sister Cities Girlchoir (which draws participants from Philadelphia; Camden, N.J.; and Baltimore). Like similar American youth choruses, the Sister Cities Girlchoir responded to the pop singer-songwriter Alicia Keys’s call for a more equal and just world, embodied by her 2014 song “We Are Here.” That year the choir, taking up the challenge, released an inspiring video performance of the song. It’s especially moving when a montage begins showing members of the choir holding up handwritten signs: “I am here for peace,” for “joyfulness,” to “make my family proud,” to “make music.”
Jonas Kaufmann’s role debut as Tristan was the surefire box office draw for the Boston Symphony Orchestra’s concert performances of Act II from Wagner’s “Tristan und Isolde” in Boston and at Carnegie Hall recently. But what of his fellow singers? The bass Georg Zeppenfeld might have stolen the show as an assured yet heartbreaking Marke. And from the rehearsals and concerts I saw, Camilla Nylund, a soprano who has never performed at the Met but has an established career in Europe, seemed to be getting better acquainted with the role of Isolde every day. After all, she comes at this opera with Wagner cred: Watch her as Elisabeth in this clip from “Tannhäuser” in Baden-Baden, Germany, in 2008. She sings with hymn-like beauty, but also persuasive authority, as she tells the singers and knights to have mercy on Tannhäuser because the “the savior once suffered for him, too.” JOSHUA BARONE
Read our interview with Ms. Nylund, Mr. Kaufmann and Andris Nelsons about the love duet in “Tristan.”
Read our review of the Boston Symphony at Carnegie Hall.
The oddest thing about the Boston Symphony’s account of the second act of “Tristan und Isolde” — at least as I heard it at Symphony Hall last Saturday — was that it was at its best away from the headlines it had clearly been set up to earn. The vaunted tenor Jonas Kaufmann was singing chunks of Tristan for the first time, and there was some wondrously alluring singing, especially in quiet moments. On the whole, though, he was stuck in his score, and his studious reading lacked both his usual way with words and his ordinarily thrilling power. The result was strangely anonymous and uninvolving. Camilla Nylund’s Isolde had a warm, attractive tone, too, but despite the conductor Andris Nelsons’ best efforts to rein in an orchestra on already fuzzy form, she struggled to cut through. Ah, well: Georg Zeppenfeld completely inhabited the role of King Marke, and Mihoko Fujimura was close to an ideal Brangäne. DAVID ALLEN
One aspect of Bernstein’s “The Age of Anxiety” (Symphony No. 2) that has probably prevented this ambitious and unconventional work from attaining a solid place in the standard repertory is the daunting solo piano part. But Jean-Yves Thibaudet has made this symphony something of a specialty, as he proved again on Wednesday at Carnegie Hall with the Boston Symphony. The piano part goes through quick shifts, from dreamy musings to flinty outbursts, spiky 12-tone like intricacies and sizzling jazz. Mr. Thibaudet is also featured in the bracing 2013 recording of the piece by Marin Alsop (a Bernstein protégée) and the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra, which has just been reissued as part of box set of Ms. Alsop’s complete Bernstein recordings for Naxos, an outstanding contribution to the Bernstein centennial year. During a climactic passage in the “Dirge” section, Mr. Thibaudet vividly conveys the unsettling nervousness of the music, even during seemingly pensive stretches. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Last Saturday, the valuable (and affordable) Peoples’ Symphony Concerts series presented the singing actress Ute Lemper. In the company of a sometimes-swinging backing trio, Ms. Lemper took a winding route through her catalog: a little bit of Brecht/Weill here, songs associated with Marlene Dietrich there. One lesser-known tune that proved a highlight was “It’s All A Swindle,” by the Weimar-era composer Mischa Spoliansky. (As on a Decca recording, “Berlin Cabaret Songs,” Ms. Lemper sang a version translated into English.) During a passage about widespread political corruption coexisting with record corporate profits, she at first sounded lighthearted, as though hiply inured to evergreen outrages. But by the end of the stanza, she was tossing off throatier, more desperate expressions — a dramatization of the civic ravages that easy cynicism can leave behind. SETH COLTER WALLS
In a fascinating concert at BRIC House in Brooklyn on Thursday evening (to be repeated on Saturday afternoon), the Knights explored influences of folk and Roma music in works by Brahms and Ligeti. They called the program “Hungarian Rock,” after a classic harpsichord piece by Ligeti, which they played in a deft arrangement for small orchestra by Michael P. Atkinson, full of shifting instrumental colors. The performance was deeply engaging, but it lost the manic quality of the original, with its repeated driving rhythm in the left hand, even as the right crosses under in a plunge to the bass register. Ying-Hsueh Chen, a Taiwanese-born percussionist based in Copenhagen captures that quality well here, and she doesn’t let go until Ligeti’s almost comically static coda. JAMES R. OESTREICH
The Knights risked being upstaged in their “Hungarian Rock” program at BRIC House on Thursday evening by their opening act, Black Sea Hotel, a Brooklyn-based female vocal trio that fancies itself a “punk rock version of Le Mystère des Voix Bulgares.” The women sang or belted Bulgarian and Macedonian folk tunes in close harmony or purposeful disharmony. Especially compelling was the way they moved harmonies either up or down in parallel. An epic droop occurs in the Bulgarian song “Spava Mi Se, Lega Mi Se,” about a boy infatuated with a neighbor girl, heard here in a 2014 performance from Santa Fe, N.M. JAMES R. OESTREICH
