What’s on TV Sunday: Country Music Awards and ‘The Walking Dead’
Carrie Underwood and others perform at the Academy of Country Music Awards. And “The Walking Dead” ends its eighth season.
THE 53RD ANNUAL ACADEMY OF COUNTRY MUSIC AWARDS 8 p.m. on CBS. Few genres romanticize rags-to-riches stories the way country music does. This show, hosted by Reba McEntire, will recognize promising newcomers and impressive veterans from the past year. Chris Stapleton, Garth Brooks, Miranda Lambert and Keith Urban are among those nominated for top awards. The broadcast will feature performances by Carrie Underwood, Lady Antebellum, Florida Georgia Line and Jason Aldean, among others.
RIO (2011) 5 p.m. on FXM. This animated feature, set in the director Carlos Saldanha’s native Rio de Janeiro, brings affection and fun to a story about a kidnapped bird adjusting to a new culture. Anne Hathaway and Jesse Eisenberg voice a pair of macaws. Jamie Foxx and will.i.am voice a canary and a cardinal. “Rio 2” (2014) follows at 7.
THE WALKING DEAD 9 p.m. on AMC. A final episode wraps up the eighth season of AMC’s zombie megahit. Right after, at 10, a new season of its spinoff, “Fear the Walking Dead,” begins. Morgan (Lennie James), a character in the main series, appears in the first episode of the spinoff’s fourth season.
PHANTOM THREAD (2017) on iTunes and Amazon. Paul Thomas Anderson’s latest film is about a man who thinks the world revolves around him. Daniel Day Lewis plays that man, a dressmaker in 1950s London named Reynolds Woodcock, in what he has said was his final screen performance. Vicky Krieps portrays Alma, a waitress who becomes his partner in both love and verbal sparring. “It’s a chamber piece, romantic and baroque in equal measure, with arresting harmonies and ravishing changes of tone,” A.O. Scott wrote in his review for The New York Times. It also features an Oscar-nominated score by Jonny Greenwood.
MOON (2009) on Netflix. A film about a man revolving around the world, Duncan Jones’s solemn and surreal science-fiction meditation stars Sam Rockwell as a lone astronaut working on a lunar mine. It takes place in a future where energy is harvested there. To say much about Mr. Rockwell’s performance would be to spoil the plot; it calls for him to play different versions of a single person.
MANIFESTO (2017) on iTunes and Amazon. Cate Blanchett plays a collection of people in Julian Rosefeldt’s experimental movie. Adapted from an art installation, the film features Ms. Blanchett reading political and artistic manifestoes from throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, delivered through a rapidly shifting, diverse range of characters. In his review for The Times, Glenn Kenny wrote that the film is “a very elaborate intellectual exercise, immaculate in every technical detail.”
MAYA ANGELOU: AND STILL I RISE (2016) on PBS.org and Netflix. This documentary looks at the life of the poet, from her childhood to her friendships with figures like Malcolm X and James Baldwin. “This is a documentary interested in breadth rather than depth,” Ken Jaworowski wrote in his review for The Times, “and on those terms it succeeds.”
