SummerStage Will Celebrate Hip-Hop’s Past
When summer arrives in New York City, so will a cavalcade of hip-hop acts spanning generations. While the Pulitzer Prize-winner Kendrick Lamar and ASAP Ferg will embody the genre’s present at Hot 97’s Summer Jam on June 10, the City Parks Foundation’s SummerStage Festival will look further into hip-hop’s past, with free shows by Big Daddy Kane, Talib Kweli, Pete Rock and the Lox.
The festival as a whole will offer more than 100 free shows spanning pop music, opera, dance, and spoken word across the five boroughs. Performances kick off in Central Park on June 2 with the jazz singer Gregory Porter. The following week on June 9, there will a tribute to David Bowie, with performers including the Donny McCaslin Group, who played on his last album, “Blackstar.” Rhiannon Giddens, a MacArthur Fellow, performs June 16, while Eddie Palmieri and Tony Vega team up on Aug. 26. And the Metropolitan Opera Summer Recital Series will visit all five boroughs across the summer.
In dance programming, the Alonzo King LINES Ballet will perform on July 25 in Central Park. And in a series of open workshops starting on June 22, instructors from Alvin Ailey will teach the group’s seminal work, “Revelations,” for dancers of all levels.
But one of the festival’s central strains is its exploration of hip-hop’s history. The 80s will be represented by Big Daddy Kane, who will celebrate the 30th anniversary of his debut album, “Long Live the Kane,” at the Ford Amphitheater at Coney Island on June 20, and EPMD, at Springfield Park, Queens on July 8. Pete Rock, who arrived with the subsequent jazz-oriented generation, will perform on July 28 in Central Park, while the turn-of-the-century lyricist Talib Kweli plays Betsy Head Park on June 30. And the modern era will be represented by Young M.A. (July 29), Dej Loaf (Aug. 12), and Rapsody (Aug. 19).
A benefit series with paid ticketing will also run concurrently, with performances from Liam Gallagher, Trombone Shorty, and Blood Orange. A full lineup can be found at www.SummerStage.org.
