Seeking Orchestras in Tune With Their Diverse Communities
Orchestras are among America’s least racially diverse institutions. African-American musicians accounted for only 1.8 percent of the nation’s orchestra players in 2014, according to an industry study, which found that the figure had not grown in over a decade.
Three national organizations aim to change that, announcing on Wednesday that they are joining forces to try to help more African-American and Hispanic musicians audition for and land coveted orchestra jobs.
The new initiative — created by the Sphinx Organization, the New World Symphony and the League of American Orchestras — will train musicians for auditions, pair them with mentors, showcase their work in concerts and give them stipends to travel to auditions.
It is the latest effort to diversify American classical music, which has lagged behind other fields. Women have made great gains in orchestras in recent decades, especially since the advent of blind auditions, in which job applicants try out behind screens. But racial diversity has been slow to come to American orchestras, which are looking less and less like the cities in which they play.
Orchestras remained 85 percent white in 2014, according to the league, and most of their modest rise in racial diversity in recent years was driven by an increase in the number of musicians of Asian or Pacific Islander heritage. Hispanic musicians made up only 2.5 percent of orchestra players in 2014, up from 1.8 percent in 2002. Small orchestras were more racially diverse than large ones.
Many factors have been cited as contributing to the problem, from the lack of diversity at the conservatories that make up the pipeline of trained musicians to blind auditions, which helped with gender equity but make it harder for orchestras to choose talented players of color. The new initiative, supported by a four-year, $1.8 million grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, aims to help black and Hispanic musicians navigate the challenging audition process — where it is not uncommon for hundreds of talented, well-trained candidates to find themselves competing for a single opening.
The program, being called the National Alliance for Audition Support, will begin in June, when 18 string players will go to Miami to train with the New World Symphony, a renowned orchestral academy, at a three-day intensive course in preparing for auditions.
“There’s a good bit of that that’s musical training, but there’s also psychological training,” said Howard Herring, the president of New World, who said that the players would all sit through mock auditions that seek to replicate real ones.
The Sphinx Organization, a national group based in Detroit and devoted to fostering diversity in music, will administer the program, and give concerts to showcase the musicians to the industry. Afa S. Dworkin, the president and artistic director of Sphinx, said in a statement that it was “a critical time for all of us to act with renewed commitment and drive to help our orchestras to be more reflective of their communities.”
The orchestra league, which has made diversity one of its main issues, will work with its 700 member ensembles, which will provide funding and mentors, Jesse Rosen, its president, said. He said that he had been encouraged by the enthusiasm orchestras have shown for the program. “We are encouraged, because we got 100 percent yeses,” he said in an interview. “People said ‘This is very important, and we want in.’”
