7 Classical Music Concerts to See in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to the city’s best classical music and opera happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
LAWRENCE BROWNLEE at Zankel Hall (April 24, 7:30 p.m.). What to pair with Schumann’s “Dichterliebe,” the classic first half of this recital from a fine tenor? “Why don’t I think about doing some type of song cycle, detailing our own perspective of what it is to be a black man in America?” Mr. Brownlee asked himself, according to a recent interview with The New York Times. Here, then, is the local premiere of “Cycles of My Being,” with lyrics by the poet Terrance Hayes and music by Tyshawn Sorey, an outstanding young composer who will conduct a small accompanying ensemble.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
JULIA BULLOCK at Weill Recital Hall (April 20, 7:30 p.m.). Scratch your head to try to understand why Ms. Bullock, already a consummate artist, will be presented on the least of Carnegie’s stages — and while you’re at it, start dialing for returns. With the pianist John Arida, she performs Schubert, Barber and Fauré, as well as jazz and blues numbers.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
CHELSEA SYMPHONY at the American Museum of Natural History (April 22, 2 p.m.). Celebrate Earth Day with this cute idea: hearing John Luther Adams’s Pulitzer Prize-winning “Become Ocean” in the Milstein Hall of Ocean Life, under its 94-foot whale model. The aquatic theme continues with Hovhaness’s “And God Created Great Whales” and the premiere of Michael Boyman’s “The Howling Wilderness.” Seats are first come first served with museum admission.chelseasymphony.org
ENSEMBLE ÉCHAPPÉ at St. Peter’s Church (April 20, 8 p.m.). Going wherever the violinist Miranda Cuckson takes you is sound policy, and in this case, it’s to the New York premiere of Michael Hersch’s Violin Concerto. There is also the premiere of a clarinet concerto, “Astounding Angels,” by Jonathan Dawe — with Vasko Dukovski as the soloist — and music by Phil Taylor and Nina C. Young.ensemble-echappe.com
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC at David Geffen Hall (April 26, 7:30 p.m.; April 28, 8 p.m.). Leif Ove Andsnes continues to make his residency with the Philharmonic a tour through the ever-so-slightly unexpected, with this performance of Debussy’s “Fantaisie,” a work that has gone through something of a rehabilitation in the centenary of the composer’s death. Also on the bill, Sibelius’s “Pohjola’s Daughter” and Bartok’s Concerto for Orchestra. Edward Gardner, an increasingly solid conductor, is on the podium.212-875-5656, nyphil.org
‘TOSCA’ at the Metropolitan Opera (April 21, 8 p.m., through May 12). Anna Netrebko is singing Tosca. If you need to know more, note that her husband, Yusif Eyvazov, sings Cavaradossi, Michael Volle is Scarpia and Bertrand de Billy conducts in David McVicar’s avowedly conservative production.212-362-6000, metopera.org
DANIIL TRIFONOV at Carnegie Hall (April 25-26, 8 p.m.). More from Mr. Trifonov’s Perspectives series this week, but the view is singular: Nothing but Chopin is on the agenda, all with the help of the Kremerata Baltica, a chamber orchestra. On Wednesday, works include the Piano Trio (with Gidon Kremer and Giedre Dirvanauskaite) and the Piano Concerto No. 1; on Thursday, there’s the Piano Concerto No. 2, the Cello Sonata (with Gautier Capuçon) and more.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org
