14 Pop, Rock and Jazz Concerts to Check Out in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
ANNA & ELIZABETH at Le Poisson Rouge (April 23, 8:30 p.m.). On “The Invisible Comes to Us,” their first album for Smithsonian Folkways, the banjoist Elizabeth LaPrelle and the multi-instrumentalist Anna Roberts-Gevalt perform traditional folk songs in quietly subversive ways, with flecks of found sound and unusual percussion accenting the old verses. Listen to “Jeano,” the antiwar ballad that opens the LP, and reflect on the timelessness of some American heartaches.212-505-3474, lpr.com
HARAM at Sunnyvale (April 20, 8:30 p.m.). Led by the charismatic screamer Nader Habibi, a Lebanese-American native of Yonkers, this hard-core band plays fast, loud and mad, with Arabic lyrics lacing into Islamophobia and other hypocrisies (listen to highlights from Haram’s 2017 full-length debut such as “Not a Terrorist” and “Who Am I, Who Are You?”). It’s an incisive social critique you can mosh to.877-987-6487, sunnyvalebk.com
OKKERVIL RIVER at the Strand (April 21, 8 p.m.). On Okkervil River’s upcoming ninth album, “In the Rainbow Rain,” the characteristically introspective songwriter Will Sheff swings toward wide-screen guitar pop with shades of Springsteen and Petty. It’s a satisfying shift in tactics. Mr. Sheff will explore it further at this interview and performance event in the Rare Book Room of the Strand, where he’ll surely feel at home among those miles of books.strandbooks.com
LINDI ORTEGA at Mercury Lounge (April 26, 6:30 p.m.). The self-described “country gothic noir” singer Lindi Ortega’s latest album, “Liberty,” is a concept set around a lonesome figure on the run, with ample echoes of Ennio Morricone, Willie Nelson and Dolly Parton. “You took my life and wrecked it / But I’ve been resurrected,” she sings on “The Comeback Kid.” Ms. Ortega will bring her spaghetti western sense of drama to the East Village on Thursday.877-987-6487, mercuryeastpresents.com/mercurylounge
THE RESIDENTS at Murmrr Theater (April 22, 8 p.m.). “Rock’s best-known nobodies, the Residents, played their first New York show Thursday night,” Jon Pareles wrote in The New York Times 32 years ago. The eyeball-headed, quasi-anonymous pranksters — still nobodies after all these years — will return to the city this weekend, invading the comparatively sedate quarters of the Murmrr Theater with their gonzo sound art.877-435-9849, murmrr.com
PATTI SMITH at Beacon Theater (April 23, 7 p.m.). The new concert documentary “Horses: Patti Smith and Her Band,” filmed in Los Angeles in 2016, has its world premiere on Monday night as part of the Tribeca Film Festival. After the 77-minute screening, Ms. Smith and her longtime backing band will perform songs, including the title track of the classic 1975 album for which the film is named.800-745-3000, beacontheatre.com
WHY DON’T WE at PlayStation Theater (April 23, 7 p.m.). The aspiring mogul who put together Why Don’t We in 2016 once explained his motivation as follows: “I thought about how there hasn’t been a great American boy band since ’N Sync,” Jon Lucero told Rolling Stone. The ingratiating five-man pop group are still a long way from ’N Sync’s peak level of cultural influence and fame, but they’re making some headway: Witness the millions of streams for their new single, “Trust Fund Baby,” whose peppy melody is likely to appeal to fans of its writer, Ed Sheeran. This weekend, Why Don’t We-mania comes to New York for a three-night stand, the first two dates of which (April 21-22) are sold out.212-930-1940, playstationtheater.com
SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON
BROOKLYN RAGA MASSIVE WITH AMIR ELSAFFAR at the Jazz Gallery (April 20-21, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). What raga is to South Asian music — a system of melodic patterns that also serve broadly as a guide — maqam roughly is to Arab, Turkish and Persian music. At this concert Mr. ElSaffar, a remarkable Iraqi-American trumpeter, joins the Carnatic violinist Arun Ramamurthy and other members of the Brooklyn Raga Massive for a series of original works that interweave maqam and raga techniques.646-494-3625, jazzgallery.nyc
THE MESSTHETICS at the Bell House (April 20, 8 p.m.). There are two story lines for the Messthetics: It’s a reunion band, bringing together the bassist Joe Lally and the drummer Brendan Canty from Fugazi, an iconic Washington, D.C., post-punk ensemble; and it’s a place of ascent for Anthony Pirog, an extravagantly creative young guitarist hailing from Fugazi’s hometown. And the music that this trio creates has a double identity, too: sometimes a tangle of electric laceration, elsewhere an ethereal sprawl.thebellhouseny.com
NICHOLAS PAYTON QUARTET at Smoke (April 20-22, 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Payton has gone from being a straight-ahead jazz prodigy from New Orleans to an advocate for a pan-African musical approach, and a restless experimenter in his own right (case in point: his most recent album, “Afro-Caribbean Mixtape”). He performs here with Taylor Eigsti on piano, Barry Stephenson on bass and Jonathan Barber on drums — a band suggesting that Mr. Payton will be leaning toward the acoustic-jazz side of his sound.212-864-6662, smokejazz.com
SOFÍA REI at the Stone (April 24-28, 8:30 p.m.). Ms. Rei, a vocalist hailing from Argentina, sings in a windblown, mountains-high voice, but she often sounds like she might be withholding something, too. It’s as if maybe the full delivery might be too overpowering — an engrossing suggestion. On Tuesday, Ms. Rei will perform a portion of John Zorn’s newly released, 11-volume collection, “The Book Beriah,” the closing installment of his epic “Masada” series. On Wednesday, she performs material from her own most recent album, a dedication to the Chilean folk icon Violeta Parra. On Thursday, she presents a gathering of eight vocalists titled “Slides, Stills & Snapshots.”thestonenyc.com
TOMEKA REID QUARTET at the Jewish Museum (April 26, 7:30 p.m.). When playing in a swing rhythm, Ms. Reid creates a flow with her cello that’s tensile and quick — like so much free jazz of the 1970s and ’80s — but also earthy and more sturdily organized. Her playing has a sandpapery warmth and a stately power, and often a thick backbone of funk. Here she performs with Mary Halvorson on guitar, Jason Roebke on bass and Tomas Fujiwara on drums, the quartet behind a strong self-titled album from 2015. The concert is presented through a partnership between the Jewish Museum and Bang on a Can.212-423-3337, thejewishmuseum.org
MATANA ROBERTS at the Park Avenue Armory (April 24, 7 and 9 p.m.). Ms. Roberts is an alto saxophonist with a big, blooming tone. She’s also a historically minded conceptualist, digging deeply into the workings of memory and taking up arms against the present-day traumas that will haunt us in the years ahead. Her primary musical form is the long suite, but recently she’s also solidified a visual art practice. Ms. Roberts is represented by the Fridman Gallery in Lower Manhattan, where her second solo exhibition, “Jump at the Sun,” is on view through Wednesday. In the mixed-media works presented there, she uses combinations of sound, musical scores, old photographs and other collaged items. This concert, uptown at the Park Avenue Armory, coincides with the closing of that show and features Ms. Roberts joined by a poet known as Geng and a sextet of snare drummers.212-616-3930, armoryonpark.org
GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO
BC35 RECORD RELEASE SHOW at St. Vitus (April 20, 7 p.m.). Thirty-five years ago, in an old factory space in Gowanus, Brooklyn, the producer and musician Martin Bisi established BC Studio, where he’s has been at the controls for underground classics such as Sonic Youth’s “Bad Moon Rising” and the Dresden Dolls’ self-titled debut. Fittingly, Mr. Bisi is honoring this anniversary with a righteous racket: first by releasing a compilation with bands he has produced, as well as some he put together and one that was resurrected for the occasion, and then by celebrating that album with those groups at clubs in Brooklyn, Boston and Philadelphia. This Greenpoint stop will feature New Old Skull, a reunion of members of Live Skull; Excop, an improvisational instrumental collusion between the bassist Algis Kizys (Swans, Foetus, Of Cabbages and Kings) and three members of Cop Shoot Cop (Jack Nantz on bass, Phil Puleo on percussion and Jim Coleman on electronics); Nowhere Near, with Mr. Bisi on guitar, Bob Bert (Sonic Youth, Lydia Lunch) on drums, Ryan SkeletonBoy (the Art Gray Noizz Quintet) on bass, and Ivan Lip (Pop. 1280) and Alyse Lamb (Parlor Walls) on guitar; as well as the psychedelic churn of White Hills and the sonic abrasiveness of Tidal Channel. The evening promises to be ear-splittingly glorious, so you might want to bring protection — or just savor the tinnitus later.877-987-6487, saintvitusbar.com
DANIELLE DOWLING
