Review: Two Masters Unite in a Meeting of Musical Minds
When musical soloists at the top of their respective fields join forces, it can make for a formidable meeting of sensibilities, a fascinating friction, or both. With the British tenor Mark Padmore and his compatriot pianist Paul Lewis performing songs of Schumann and Brahms at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday evening, it was mostly a meeting of minds, and fine ones.
The program consisted entirely of songs to poems of Heinrich Heine, who inspired both composers repeatedly. The many Heine songs Brahms wrote as a youth were among the works that this most self-critical of composers consigned to the fireplace. But six of his later lieder were here, along with Schumann’s two great Heine cycles: “Dichterliebe” (“A Poet’s Love”) and the Opus 24 “Liederkreis” (“Song Circle”), among his greatest creations.
Mr. Padmore, in remarks from the stage, pointed to another unifying factor in the program: All the songs were written with an eye toward Clara Schumann, the great love of both composers’ lives. The songs of Schumann’s cycles — both published in 1840, the year he finally married Clara Wieck after a separation imposed by her father — were essentially love letters written from afar. And Brahms, whatever the nature of the intimacy he may have shared with Clara before and after Schumann’s death in 1856, dispatched his Heine efforts of the 1870s and ’80s to her.
In any case, of Heine’s two great Romantic preoccupations, Mr. Padmore said, Schumann leaned more toward thwarted love, in “bitter and acerbic” poems. Brahms leaned more toward death, in “less troubled” texts; this composer saw death as Heine’s “cool night” as early as 1885, 11 years before his biblical contemplations of the subject in “Four Serious Songs.”
Mr. Padmore did not so much sing this music as inhabit it. He seemed less concerned with tonal allure than with tracing every line, every emotion as it passed.
He threw himself into the music, reminding me at times of his acclaimed interpretation of the Evangelist in Bach’s “St. Matthew Passion” with the Berlin Philharmonic, under Peter Sellars’s direction, but to better effect here. (Perhaps a minority of one, I thought that Mr. Sellars turned Mr. Padmore into a sort of voodoo doll, grotesquely enacting Jesus’s sufferings as he powerfully described them.)
Mr. Padmore projected the texts admirably and produced much beautiful tone, but there was also a lot of purposefully strained, attenuated sound in the high register. The only real disappointment, with memory of Matthias Goerne’s burly baritonal “Dichterliebe” in February still in mind, was Mr. Padmore’s reading of the rumbling “Ich Grolle Nicht” (“I Don’t Complain”), which seemed, perhaps inevitably, lightweight.
Mr. Lewis interacted artfully with Mr. Padmore, always present and expanding to fill the gaps in the text. His most delightful moment of friction came in “Das ist ein Flöten und Geigen” (“What a Fluting and Fiddling”) in “Dichterliebe,” where he rambled off on his own, gaily winding around and through the song.
His postludes were little gems, except at the end of “Dichterliebe,” where he made a potent and definitive statement. No encore was needed, or perhaps even possible.
