Bristling Energy: The Best Classical Music Moments of the Week
Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them over the past week. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
It’s rare that a conservatory offers one of the operatic events of the season, but this week the Juilliard School had a coup with a rare staging of Rameau’s “Hippolyte et Aricie,” a French Baroque masterpiece that set off an aesthetic war at its 1733 premiere. Despite Juilliard’s ill-advised snipping of the work’s crucial prologue, and despite a questionable interpolation at the end, the designs were stylish; the direction an apt evocation of the grand stylization of French classical theater; the cast and players eloquent; and the opportunity altogether memorable. (The third and final performance is on Saturday.) Rameau’s music bristles with a proud elegance that barely conceals seething energy, and both elegance and energy abound in Marc Minkowski’s recording of the work: Try not to be swept up in the scene of a hunt dedicated to the goddess Diana. ZACHARY WOOLFE
Read more about the opera.
Read our review of Juilliard’s “Hippolyte” production.
I agree with most of what my colleague Zachary Woolfe wrote about Juilliard’s production of Rameau’s “Hippolyte et Aricie.” But I wasn’t bothered by the addition of the exquisite and concise Act IV Entrée from Rameau’s “Les Boréades” at the end. It suited the ambiguity of the closing mood of “Hippolyte” and seemed fair compensation for the sometimes stodgy pacing Mr. Woolfe complains of (his word, “stolid”), which only emphasized the work’s occasional longueurs. Jordi Savall conducts Le Concert des Nations in the Entrée here, stepping up its pace a bit from the usual. And stay tuned for the engaging Contredance that follows. JAMES R. OESTREICH
At 46, the elegant, lively pianist Till Fellner made his debut with the New York Philharmonic this week. It’s about time. This thoughtful Austrian artist first came to international attention in 1993 when he won the Clara Haskil Competition. He has made some outstanding recordings — the best, for me, is his 2004 survey of Bach’s Well-Tempered Klavier, Book I. For his Philharmonic debut (there are two more performances, on Saturday and Tuesday) he plays Mozart’s Piano Concerto No. 22 in E flat, one of the pieces with which he scored his Haskil victory and recorded back then. The third movement, a Rondo, begins with a deceptively simple, seemingly cute little tune. But a minute or so in, Mozart explores the complex implications of that theme in an inventive episode that Fellner plays brilliantly, with a touch of slyness. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Much of the attention after the Pulitzer Prize in Music was announced this week was focused on the winner. Understandably: Kendrick Lamar, a popular and critical darling, became the first hip-hop performer — indeed, the first artist outside classical and jazz — to get the prize, for his album “DAMN.” 
But there is sensitivity and sincerity in a string quartet by Michael Gilbertson, one of the two finalists. The other, Ted Hearne, was recognized for “Sound from the Bench,” a cantata for choir (the extraordinary Crossing, out of Philadelphia), electric guitars and drums. Melting voices, driving rhythms, wailing guitar: Mr. Hearne conjures a kind of medieval-psychedelic landscape to reflect on fragments of texts from Supreme Court proceedings about the ambiguous nature of speech and identity. The piece commands attention from the beginning, as a moment of stillness and purity is shattered by a guitar’s growl. ZACHARY WOOLFE
Read a conversation about the implications of Mr. Lamar’s Pulitzer win.
Read a remarkable, inspiring interview with Mr. Hearne and Mr. Gilbertson.
In an impressive feat for well-trod repertory, the tenor Mark Padmore, performing at Alice Tully Hall with the pianist Paul Lewis on Thursday, managed to bring new illumination and poignancy to Schumann’s great song cycle “Dichterliebe.” The recital had more Schumann, opening with his Opus 24 “Liederkreis,” but for me the biggest surprise of the night came in a small batch of Brahms songs sandwiched between the two cycles. One in particular, “Der Tod, das ist die küle Nacht” (“Death Is Cool Night”), caught me off guard for its blatant Romanticism — death as night, life as “sultry day” — which Brahms seems to have embraced in his setting of the Heinrich Heine text. Alas, there is no video on YouTube of Mr. Padmore performing this song. But you can hear one of his evocative mannerisms in this old recording by Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, when he flatly delivers the phrase “mich schläfert” (“I feel drowsy”). JOSHUA BARONE
Read our review of the recital.
Carnegie Hall’s elaborate concert version of Bernstein’s “Candide” on Wednesday, celebrating the Bernstein centenary, featured ample star power (John Lithgow, Paul Appleby, Erin Morley, Patricia Racette and William Burden, with cameo appearances by Len Cariou and Marilyn Horne); the typically excellent Orchestra of St. Luke’s; and huge, quietly clever projections designed by Wendall K. Harrington. Somewhat overshadowed by all of this was the superb work of the Mansfield University Concert Choir, of Pennsylvania, long directed by Peggy Dettwiler. Here, in a 2017 concert, the group performs the concluding number of “Candide,” “Make Our Garden Grow.” JAMES R. OESTREICH
The casting of Carnegie Hall’s “Candide” was almost offensively luxurious. Erin Morley, whose high notes were a highlight of “Les Contes d’Hoffmann” at the Metropolitan Opera last fall, breezed through Cunégonde’s crowd-pleasing number “Glitter and Be Gay.” And the tenor Paul Appleby sang Candide with an unwavering blissful naïveté that reminded me of his outstanding turn in the Met’s brief run of Stravinsky’s “The Rake’s Progress” in 2015. You can get a (brief again, sorry) taste about 20 seconds into this video from the Dutch National Opera. He’s foolish, full-voiced and earnest — a perfect fit for this role, and for Candide. JOSHUA BARONE
The cellist Seth Parker Woods isn’t just a virtuoso on his instrument. He’s also got fantastic taste, whether he’s playing in electronic environments or acoustically, as he did in his program on Wednesday at the Italian Academy at Columbia University. Mr. Woods framed his free hourlong set there with two works by Giacinto Scelsi. But he built out the program with smart pairings, including lesser-known works like Claudio Gabriele’s “PNOM.” In a video of an earlier performance of that work, you get a sense of all the stops a composer can ask a player to pull out. Precisely controlled changes in bow pressure result in savagely screeching motifs, gentle harmonics, or else a stray passage of limpid dance. SETH COLTER WALLS
Last weekend in Rochester, a mixed bag of young singers vied for the top prize in the final round of the 20th annual Lotte Lenya Competition — a tough but lucrative contest that requires singers to perform four songs, ranging widely, in quick succession. Among the top-prize winners was the 29-year-old John Brancy, who filled the Eastman School of Music’s Kilbourn Hall with a buttery baritone voice that seemed equally at ease in opera and in music from Broadway’s golden age. He opened with the aria “Uzhel ta samaja Tatiana,” from Act III of Tchaikovsky’s “Eugene Onegin.” Listen for the surprise, excitement and regret as he sings of realizing that he is in love with the same Tatyana he once dismissed as a younger bachelor. JOSHUA BARONE
