10 Treasures, Unearthed From the New York Philharmonic’s Archives 
Imagine what you could find if you rummaged through the attic of America’s oldest orchestra, the New York Philharmonic, founded in 1842. A Beethoven score, annotated decades apart by Mahler and Toscanini, two Philharmonic music directors who didn’t always see eye to eye. A flute part from the 1893 premiere of Dvorak’s “New World” Symphony. A “Mahler Grooves” bumper sticker that Leonard Bernstein put in his score of Mahler’s Sixth.
For more than three decades, the Philharmonic’s rummager-in-chief has been Barbara Haws, its first archivist and historian. She has been a visionary, photographing its collection and making much of it available online as part of a digital archive that now has 1,789 marked scores, more than 13,880 programs and reams of historical board minutes and correspondence. She recently announced that she is retiring to pursue a doctorate at Oxford University, studying Ureli Corelli Hill, the Philharmonic’s founder — whose diary she acquired for the archive.
As she prepared to leave, she chose 10 favorite treasures from the archive. Below are her explanations of their significance.
When reading this you hear a recognizable American who keeps track of every penny he spends, complains about getting baggage through customs, all in addition to complete details of how Mendelssohn conducts the premiere of his “St. Paul” oratorio.
It seems somewhat odd that the first thing a group of musicians does is write up and print a constitution. They don’t immediately start rehearsing for their first concert; rather, they define their relationship to one another as a community — their rights and responsibilities.
This is an amazing document because you can see how the conductor and composer collaborate in the rehearsal as they prepare a new work for performance. The conductor Anton Seidl’s idea of the Largo turns out to be different from the composer’s. But the composer thinks the conductor’s tempo is better, so right on the spot the musicians are told to change the movement title from Larghetto to Largo, which is how we all know it today. You can also see how Dvorak directed the musicians to try repeating the last bar of the first movement and decided he liked it, so the musician wrote ‘good’! It is a classic example of what all composers and orchestras go through when trying to bring a new work to performance.
I don’t know of another historical document like music, that is fixed on the printed page but then is transformed by the interpreting artist again and again. My favorite is the score of Beethoven’s Seventh Symphony, dramatically marked by Gustav Mahler in 1909. In 1929, Arturo Toscanini, reviewing the score, was indignant at the Mahler revisions and expressed his disapproval by writing on the score that his predecessor’s changes were “unworthy of such a musician.” Later, another anonymous message appeared under Toscanini’s: “Nomina stultorum sunt ubique locorum,” or “The names of fools appear everywhere.”
In 2009, 100 years after Mahler marked the score for a Philharmonic concert that took place just before his start as the orchestra’s new music director, another former Philharmonic music director, Pierre Boulez, visited the archives. Glossing through the contentious Beethoven Seven score — which included cut upper-trumpet parts and doublings, most conspicuously in the cello — Boulez concluded, as though obvious, “Mahler was having trouble with his orchestra.” Under this reading, the edits were simply accommodations to the technical level of the Philharmonic at that time.
This is the earliest moving image of an orchestra where you can hear them play. It was breathtaking when I first saw this, since I knew so many of the players frozen in sepia-toned photographs, and there they were. And the sound is really quite good.
I have always said that the real archives of the New York Philharmonic is sitting on stage. So many musicians play in the orchestra for 25, 40, even 50 years. And as new members come in, the traditions and stories are passed on from one to the other. In this single performance snapshot of eight musicians, the amazing continuity spans from Mahler to Mehta. Back row: Roberto Sensale (1923-57), Benjamin Kohon (1908-43), Simon Kovar (1923-49); middle row: Bruno Labate (1908-43), Engelbert Brenner (1931-72), Albert Goltzer (1938-84); front row: Martin Ormandy (1929-66), and William L. Feder (1921-49).
Even though it was considered a groundbreaking, history-making outing, to the then-Philharmonic secretary who maintained the official record of performances, he was still only the substitute. Most likely it was the last time he was ever described as such.
I love the fact that the Philharmonic has saved all of its complaint letters. It is fascinating to see what behavior the audience found offensive 70 years ago that doesn’t seem to raise an eyebrow today. But this letter captures exactly how annoyed and exasperated Bernstein could be when subscribers complained about his programming. It’s so succinct and to the point that even Ms. Selman, the recipient, was impressed — because she kept the letter, donating it to the archives after Bernstein’s death.
Being the archivist and historian for nearly 34 years means that at some point I become part of the archives and the Philharmonic narrative, too. “On the Transmigration of Souls” was commissioned in memory of those who were lost on 9/11. It was incredibly meaningful to play a small part in John’s process of conceiving the work and arranging for him to discuss it with the leaders of the survivor’s groups. It is something I will never forget. 
The orchestra’s journey to Pyongyang in 2008 was surprisingly emotional and quite moving for all of us. It proved without a doubt that music is one of the most powerful tools to bring people together.
