Yoenis Cespedes’s New Workout: More Running and More Yoga
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — When Yoenis Cespedes, the Mets’ musclebound star outfielder, begins his off-season workouts or spring training, his lower back typically stiffens. It has been a byproduct of being too tightly wound and lacking in flexibility.
“This year, I haven’t felt that,” said Cespedes, 32, of the usual back tightness.
After another year of leg injuries in 2017, Cespedes, much like the Mets as a whole did this winter with their medical and training departments, made drastic changes.
While he still trained with Mike Barwis, who oversees the organization’s strength and conditioning program from Florida, Cespedes applied three simple changes: he ran more; he lifted less; and he became more flexible, in part, with weekly yoga sessions.
“Injuries are unpredictable,” he said on Monday, the first day of full squad workouts in Mets camp. “You don’t know when they’ll happen. But what I did was better prepare myself to try and prevent them.”
In the past, Cespedes ran little, before or during the season, and he looked stiff at times sprinting around the bases. He lifted a lot of weight; he was once filmed bear-squatting 900 pounds. He did little stretching. He also drank little water, which worsened the muscle issues.
It all came to a head last season, when Cespedes, who has a lengthy history of leg injuries, played in only 81 games because of a hamstring strain in each leg. When he did play, Cespedes was effective: .292 batting average, .892 on-base-plus-slugging percentage and 17 home runs.
And when he returned from his first hamstring strain in June, Cespedes had not fully healed and couldn’t run well on the basepaths or in the field. Cespedes, who is the highest-paid Met at $29 million this year, said that would be different this season.
“When I worked with the heavy weights, I got stronger, but the muscles were too rigid,” he said. “With the yoga and not working with heavy weights, I’m a little more flexible.”
Yoga showed Cespedes that his core and legs were not pliable enough, as he struggled to hold the positions when he first tried it.
“The first few days I couldn’t even finish because it was so difficult,” he said.
Cespedes said he hoped to keep up with the yoga during the season if he could find a suitable location and instructor.
He is bullish on his body and on the Mets, saying, “This is a much better team than in 2015 when we reached the World Series.” Repeating last year’s goal, Cespedes said he wanted to be named most valuable player. He also wants to play as many games as possible. He told Mets Manager Mickey Callaway that he would like to repeat his 2015 season, in which he played in 159 games.
“We have to hold him accountable,” Callaway said. “We’ve got to make sure he’s going about his business the right way and fulfilling the routines that are necessary to go out and play everyday. But he’s taken the first great step toward that.”
