How Mirai Nagasu Grew Up and Got Back to the Olympics
PYEONGCHANG, South Korea — A long time ago, in a storage room far away, Mirai Nagasu was supposed to be asleep.
Her parents owned a sushi restaurant in suburban Los Angeles, and they couldn’t afford a babysitter for Mirai, their only child. So while they worked, Nagasu would nap on a yoga mat in a storage room until closing time. But instead of snoozing she often would read, relying on the light that peeked from beneath the door.
Harry Potter was her favorite character. He was the kid who faced great obstacles and sometimes stumbled, but he succeeded in the end.
Nagasu liked the way that sounded. Now she can relate.
At 24 — older than all but one of her competitors here — Nagasu is competing in her second Olympic women’s singles competition this week, eight roller coaster years after her first one. She is not here for sentimentality, though. She is here to win a medal.
About two-thirds of the women in the field are teenagers, which should make you realize that Nagasu is something special. At an age when most other female skaters have long been spit out of the sport because of burnout, injury, or lack of success, she not only has hung in there but has risen to another level with her jumps.
“Figure skaters are usually young and then just fade away,” she told me. “But I’m not a fade-away kind of person.”
At the 2010 Vancouver Games, Nagasu was only 16 when she finished a surprising fourth. She thought she deserved a top-three finish. So she looked to the 2014 Sochi Games as another chance for the podium.
But Nagasu — famously, and heartbreakingly for her — was passed up for the United States team that year, even though she finished third at the United States nationals. Three Americans not named Mirai Nagasu went to Sochi instead, chosen by a committee considered the skaters’ body of work that season, not merely their performance at nationals.
Nagasu cried almost nonstop in the weeks and months after being passed over. She blamed herself for being lazy. She felt as if her chance at an Olympic medal had vanished. She considered hanging up her skates, wondering if her very public journey as a skater who was brilliant but erratic was worth it. At 14, she was the second-youngest skater ever to win a United States championship, and then things grew complicated when her body started changing.
What pulled her back into skating was an April 2014 trip to Colorado Springs to visit a friend, Agnes Zawadzki. Zawadzki was training with Tom Zakrajsek, a coach who once worked with one of Nagasu’s biggest competitors, the 2010 Olympian Rachael Flatt.
Nagasu had always admired Flatt’s consistency, because it had always been Nagasu’s weakness. She took a few sessions with Zakrajsek and decided that the 2018 Olympics could be within her reach. She asked Zakrajsek to coach her, and packed up her Honda Civic for her new life in Colorado.
The daughter of Japanese immigrants, Nagasu had wanted to move out of her parents’ house in Arcadia, Calif., when she was a rebellious 17-year-old. But her mother, Ikuko, and her father, Kiyoto, would not allow it. This time, they were supportive.
So Mirai Nagasu packed up her childhood bedroom, leaving the pink Miss Smiley comforter and most everything else behind.
“Your room will always be here, just like it is in case you need an escape,” Ikuko Nagasu told Mirai before she drove away. “I promise I’m not going to make it a sewing room.”
In Colorado Springs, Nagasu lived with a host family and learned how to cook for herself. After many failed attempts, she mastered meatloaf and baked desserts for her friends at the rink. She adopted her first of three dogs, took college classes and began dating Darian Weiss, an actor, and their relationship grew serious. She eventually moved into her own house.
To help pay the bills, she got a job that was far different from when she worked at her family’s restaurant, where as a little girl she was paid in quarters for washing dishes. She became an “ice girl” for the Colorado Avalanche during the 2015-16 hockey season, and her task was to clean the ice with a shovel while wearing a tiny skirt and crop top.
Living a real life, an adult’s life, outside of the rink has helped her focus inside the rink even more. In her sport, that’s usually a foreign concept.
Nagasu was rejuvenated by Zakrajsek’s technical help but also by his pep talks. On Saturdays, he brings his skaters in for sports concepts classes, where he plays clips from inspirational movies or gives motivational lessons.
As for Nagasu’s experience with missing the 2014 Games, Zakrajsek said they had spent about five minutes on it in the past four years. There was too much ahead of them, they decided, to look back and wallow.
Ahead of them was something bigger: a triple axel. It’s a jump that only two female skaters — Mao Asada and Midori Ito of Japan — had landed at the Olympics.
At Nagasu’s age, though, learning a new jump was virtually unheard-of. The conventional wisdom in skating is that young girls learn to jump, and that women only refine what they learned as young girls. But the jump garners a tremendous number of points because of its difficulty. So she trained and trained, and last summer she finally landed it.
“She’ll do triple axels after triple axels until Tom has to drag her off the ice,” said Vincent Zhou, who finished sixth last week in the Olympic men’s singles event. “She’s incredible. She will skate 17,635 long programs and then do a short program every single day. She’s the hardest worker I know.”
In last week’s team event, Nagasu nailed her long program, including landing the triple axel. It helped the United States team win the bronze.
“I knew in my heart this day would come,” she said.
This week, in the singles, she said she believes she can land it again. Maybe then she’ll let herself fade away — a woman at the top of a girls’ sport, and one with at least one Olympic medal around her neck.
