The Daredevils Above, Their Parents Below: Welcome to Big Air Snowboarding
PYEONGCHANG, South Korea — You know what grabs your attention at big air snowboarding at the Olympics? When the announcer introduces the first rider like so:
“Cheryl Maas! Coming back from a broken neck!”
The announcer went on to say that Maas, who is 33 and from the Netherlands, had been struggling with bruised heels before coming to Pyeongchang, but to be honest, all I could hear was “broken neck.” My 6-year-old daughter, who has been watching the Olympics, just told me that snowboarding was her new favorite sport and that she loved big air. Yikes.
Big air is a new Olympic event in which snowboarders take an elevator to the top of a 14-story ramp before zipping downhill and into the air, where they attempt the craziest tricks they’ve got in their books until they finally land.
So how do parents deal with their children doing this intensely daredevil sport, where broken bones are common? I thought I’d ask.
Lisbeth and Peter Gasser, the parents of the gold medal favorite Anna Gasser from Austria, take opposite approaches. Lisbeth’s knees go weak when she sees Anna compete, and with good reason. In addition to damaging two vertebrae in her neck, Anna, 26, has banged up various other parts of her body — a knee, a tibia, a heel, an ankle.
“She’s my girl, so of course I worry, but I never let her see it,” Lisbeth Gasser said. “When she was home for two months with the neck injury, I just asked, ‘Anna, do you want to keep going? Is this worth it for you?’ and she said yes. So that was the end of the conversation.”
Yet Anna Gasser said that every time she called home at an unexpected moment, her mother was quick to say, “Are you O.K.? Are you injured?”
When I asked Peter Gasser how he remained calm during big air competitions, a family friend blurted out, “Tranquilizers!’’
Lauren Anderson, whose 27-year-old daughter, Jamie, won her second gold medal in slopestyle last week, said she wasn’t one bit nervous that Jamie was now competing in the big air event as well. Even though Jamie has already broken her collarbone and pelvis, and once ruptured her spleen.
Lauren Anderson has eight children and raises alpacas on a farm in Vermont. She said she encouraged her children to learn from the heart and from “the friendly universe,” and not necessarily from schoolbooks.
“When you have so many kids, you have to let them fall down and pick themselves up,” she said. “And I also think, it’s always going to be what it’s going to be, so why don’t you just relax and watch the show?”
I also approached Laura and Brook Corning, the parents of 18-year-old Chris Corning, who is from Colorado and among the world’s top-ranked snowboarders.
His parents said they trusted that their son was both athletic and skillful enough to make big air not as perilous as it might seem.
Chris Corning’s whole life has been filled with what his parents call “calculated risk.” At 3, he was already a skateboarder, with homemade ramps in their basement. At 7, he was a snowboarder. He once broke his thumb when it got stuck in a corrugated pipe in a snowboard park. He played football in high school, too, but eventually went just with snowboarding because the schedules conflicted.
Besides, Laura Corning said, “football is dangerous.”
Mastering big air is all about starting small and making incremental improvements as a snowboarder, the Cornings said. First you try a half turn, then a full turn. Then eventually you’re hitting 1080s, and more. It’s how big air, eventually, doesn’t seem like a big deal.
“What you want to do is just put Bubble Wrap on them because you don’t want to see them get hurt or go through the pain,” Laura Corning said. “But you can’t. That’s just not the best way to raise a child.”
For Laura Corning, a court reporter, this has been a learned mind-set. Brook Corning, a mechanical engineer, is the one with risk-taking in his genes.
Once, when Chris was about 9, his father took him backcountry snowboarding. Brook Corning said that he had to sign “about a billion waivers” before they could go and that he had to strap a beacon onto Chris so the boy could be found in an avalanche. They were also given shovels and probes, in case they needed to dig out.
“When we were hiking across a knife’s edge and there were cliffs on both sides, I thought, ‘Hmm, maybe this really isn’t a good idea,’” Brook Corning said. “But at the end of the day, we had so much fun. I’ve always trusted Chris’s athletic ability. It’s astounding.”
However, when they came home, exhausted, and described where they had been, Laura Corning was furious.
“I just lost it and might have said a few curse words,” she said. “Basically, I’ve been prepped for this big air and all that crazy stuff my entire parenthood.”
A parenthood that sometimes means watching her son hobbling away after a jump or even being taken off the slope on a stretcher. In December, Chris Corning qualified for the Olympics despite hip and back injuries, and he gingerly stepped onto the podium afterward.
When he competes, Laura Corning said, she prays. “God, please keep him safe, angels’ wings, angels’ wings,” she repeats to herself.
That nervous scene is partly why Cheryl Maas, the Dutch big air rider coming off a broken neck, doesn’t want her parents watching her compete.
Her mother, she said, “freaks out quite a bit,” a reaction that was especially intense after Maas’s crash at a World Cup event in Germany in 2016. “I broke my face,” she said. “And I think that scared her a lot.”
But there is another reason Maas doesn’t want her parents around — so she can skip worrying about them.
“It’s always like, are they having a good time, how are they dealing with the mix of culture, are they able to get a bus, did they make it on the bus?” Maas said. “I don’t want to think about that.”
Maybe, too, there’s just a little less for Maas’s parents to worry about than I first thought. When the announcer mentioned Maas’s broken neck, he didn’t bother to say that she hadn’t hurt it while competing.
It actually happened on a vacation in Cyprus, where Maas dove into a shallow hotel pool.
People can get hurt doing just about anything. Still deciding whether I’ll tell my daughter that.
