2018 N.F.L. Draft Grades: Round 1 Winners and Losers
How did all the teams do in the first round of the N.F.L. draft? We won’t know for sure for a few years. But plenty of people want to weigh in right now.
Here’s a look at the instant grades from CBS Sports, Sports Illustrated, Bleacher Report, For the Win at USA Today, Yahoo Sports and the draft site Walter Football.
According to the experts, there are players who will turn their teams into winners, and others who are already terrible busts. Sometimes it’s the same player.
[Read our analysis of every pick in the first round here.]
___
Mixed reviews for the top pick, who had looked like he was going to go more like No. 6 a few days ago. “Mayfield will bring a dynamic to the Browns offense that will allow them to do many things because of his mobility and his ability to throw the ball downfield,” said the most optimistic ranker, Bleacher Report. But Benjamin Hoffman of The New York Times raised the chilling specter of another Browns quarterback: “Is Mayfield essentially Johnny Manziel without as much baggage?” And USA Today said, “A lot will have to break right for the Oklahoma standout to end up as the best QB from this class.” Grade point average: 2.62.
Suddenly it seems to be O.K. to use a top pick on a running back. Most felt the Giants did fine with this pick. Bleacher Report was already speculating about a 1,000-yard season, and Sports Illustrated called him a “once-in-a-generation running back.” The naysayer was USA Today, which felt a quarterback would have been a better choice for the Giants: “He’ll have to be LaDainian Tomlinson for this to be considered a good pick.” G.P.A.: 3.22
A pretty solid thumbs up for the other New York pick as well. USA Today said, “The Jets gave up too much to move up to the No. 3 pick, but that won’t matter in a couple of years when Darnold develops into one of the league’s best quarterbacks.” “The Jets finally found their quarterback of the future,” Walter Football said. CBS was less excited, feeling Josh Allen or Josh Rosen would have been a better choice. G.P.A.: 3.22.
Another top pick, another B- for the Browns. Defensive end Bradley Chubb was available, making this choice a little puzzling to some. “Maybe the Browns know something we don’t,” USA Today wrote, unconvincingly. Even Bleacher Report, which gave the pick an A- said, “This is a tough one to grade.” G.P.A.: 2.62.
The hands-down best pick of the top five, the experts believe. “A pass rush consisting of Von Miller and Bradley Chubb is going to result in pure carnage for opposing offensive lines,” Bleacher Report said. Many thought the Broncos would take a quarterback, but few faulted this pick. G.P.A.: 3.92.
An offensive guard in the top six? USA Today loved it, calling Nelson “the best offensive line prospect in recent memory.” Sports Illustrated was not impressed, saying the Colts should have gone with a defensive player: “The Colts can block better now, but it won’t matter if their opponents score 40 each week.” G.P.A.: 3.48
Allen, the Wyoming quarterback, at one point was considered a candidate to go No. 1 over all. The Bills got him at No. 7 after a trade with the Buccaneers, and the grades were all over the place, ranging from an A+ to an F. CBS could not have liked it more: “They get the best QB in the draft and they had to go make the move to get him. Love the trade, love the pick.” USA Today said: “Allen is inaccurate, struggles to read defenses and is uncomfortable from the pocket. Other than that, he’s a pretty good quarterback.” It also reminded readers that last season the Bills at one point opted for Nathan Peterman over Tyrod Taylor. G.P.A.: 2.6
A pick that almost everyone liked. “Feels like the Bears got the next great young linebacker,” Yahoo said. “Smith is a very intelligent linebacker who always seems to be in the right place at the right time,” Walter Football said. “He is a smart player, a strong leader, and is the type of guy coaches will trust to make decisions on the field,” Hoffman said in The Times. G.P.A.: 3.73
Another Notre Dame lineman is chosen, but this one is not as much loved by the experts as Nelson is.
“This is a bit of a reach, but the Niners needed to find an eventual replacement for Joe Staley, who turns 34 in August,” USA Today said. But Sports Illustrated noted, “Drafting McGlinchey is a bit of a head-scratcher given that the 49ers just gave left tackle Joe Staley a raise for the next two years.” Nobody really hated the pick, but few loved it, either, as grades ranged from B to C. G.P.A.: 2.45
The Cards moved up to get Rosen, who most felt would go higher. “The best quarterback in the draft,” Bleacher Report said. “The most N.F.L.-ready passer,” CBS said. Rosen would undoubtedly have given this pick a high grade himself: “Nine mistakes were made ahead of me,” he said after being picked. G.P.A.: 3.77.
The highest grade of the draft, even higher than Chubb, went to Derwin James, the safety selected by the Chargers at No. 17. The strong consensus had been that he would go much higher, giving the Chargers a steal this low. With three A+’s, two A’s and just one B, his G.P.A. was a 3.98. “James is an explosive athlete who can be an enforcer in the box, cover slot receivers or play deep safety,” wrote USA Today.
Good grades also for these picks: Tremaine Edwards (Bills, No. 16) “An incredible player with a rare combination of size and speed,” Bleacher Report. Lamar Jackson (Ravens, No. 32) “An electric talent who will benefit from sitting behind Flacco,” Bleacher Report.
The worst pick of the first round, according to the experts? Rashaad Penny, a running back taken by the Seahawks at No. 27. CBS gave the pick a C, and that was the high point. He also got a C-, a D+ and three D’s. Many felt Penny was a solid player but that wasting a first-round pick on a decent running back was a mistake. “Penny was seen as a second- or third-round prospect among teams,” wrote Walter Football. G.P.A.: 1.33.
Two others that graded below a C: defensive end Marcus Davenport, taken by the Saints at No. 14 (“This is absolutely atrocious,” Walter Football), and safety Terrell Edmunds, taken by the Steelers at No. 28 (“Edmunds is more of a Day 3 pick,” Bleacher Report).
No player divided opinion more than Allen, but one who was close was Leighton Vander Esch, the linebacker who went to the Cowboys at No. 19. Bleacher Report gave the pick an A+: “Vander Esch can play all over the field and changes direction on a dime.” Sports Illustrated gave it a C: “Good player, but the glaring need at wideout going unaddressed can’t be forgotten.”
One of them may be right. It may take a few years, but eventually we’ll find out.
