The Mets’ Posture Improved Along With This Pitcher’s
SAN DIEGO — Like many people, pitcher Robert Gsellman, a surprising and emerging force in the Mets’ bullpen, loves playing video games. His console of choice: Xbox One. The games in heavy rotation: FIFA, Call of Duty: WW II and, until recently, NBA 2K, which he ditched because he grew tired of losing to his friends.
But a problem with the way Gsellman, 24, was playing those video games undermined his pitching. In front of a screen, he hunched over, elbows on his knees. “I was sitting like that all the time,” he said.
This poor posture, Gsellman believed, developed after surgery to repair torn cartilage in his left (nonthrowing) shoulder before the 2017 season. Although his arm was in a cast for only three weeks, it created a bad habit of leaning his shoulders forward and curving his back.
So how could that affect his pitching? The answer was important in restoring a pitcher whose versatility and distinction have boosted the team’s bullpen and who has helped propel the Mets (16-8 going into Saturday’s game) to the top ranks of the National League this season.
Throwing a baseball is a series of interconnected movements, from the toes all the way up to the fingers. Gsellman’s improper posture and a tight throwing shoulder meant he could not get his arm into a proper and consistent release point.
“I was like all over the place last year,” he said, then demonstrated a variety of different points at which he released the ball. “I was trying to get here and here and here. I wasn’t in the same slot.”
The improper alignment highlighted other deficiencies: He was not using his legs properly, and what he thought he knew about training was not enough. The kinetic chain was off, and that led to a miserable 2017 season.
“Posture is incredibly important,” said Eric Cressey, who runs Cressey Sports Performance, a training company with facilities outside Boston and in Florida, with a performance coach, Shane Rye. The Mets ace Noah Syndergaard has worked with both experts since last summer, and Gsellman followed suit last winter.
“Imagine a runner who starts five yards behind the starting line at a race; he’s either got to move much faster or find an alternate route to get to the finish line,” Cressey continued in an email. “This happens a lot with pitching mechanics, as we’re talking about the single-fastest motion of all of sports combined with a game of millimeters.”
Gsellman’s poor posture contributed to a 5.19 earned run average over 119⅔ innings last season — a year after, as an unheralded prospect, he helped save the Mets’ injury-plagued 2016 season. After starting for much of his first two years in the majors, Gsellman was briefly demoted to the bullpen last season, when a dropping arm caused his trademark sinking fastball not to sink as usual.
“It moved side to side instead of down,” he said.
So this off-season, with the help of Cressey and Rye in Jupiter, Fla., and a physical therapist, Judy Seto, the director of sports performance at Select Physical Therapy in Los Angeles, Gsellman fixed his body. A Los Angeles native, Gsellman made three visits a week to work on his right shoulder with Seto, who had supervised his rehabilitation after the surgery on his left shoulder.
Rye, who talked to Gsellman last summer about a hamstring strain, drew up an off-season program for Gsellman in person. Rye said past problems with Gsellman’s lower body had affected the way he generated and absorbed the force of pitching. An improvement with his legs would alleviate some stress on his shoulder.
This winter, Gsellman said, he stopped doing powerlifting moves like traditional squats, and instead emphasized leg workouts that helped both strengthen and loosen his limbs. When he addressed his hamstring deficiency, he said, it helped prevent knee pain he had felt in the past.
Gsellman also underwent many massages and did stretching to loosen soft tissue in and around his shoulder.
“In addition to spending time improving his rotator-cuff strength, we focused on getting his upper back and rib cage to sit and move in better positions, which in turn helped his shoulder,” Rye said.
It was all eye-opening for Gsellman.
“I wonder sometimes: How did I make it through the minor leagues?” he said. “I didn’t know anything about my body then. I rededicated myself to learn about my body, and it’s helping with the day-to-day now.”
Now, Gsellman is essential to the bullpen. His right arm is moving faster and more smoothly than before. Along with Seth Lugo and Paul Sewald, Gsellman has provided an important bridge between inconsistent starting pitchers and the back-end relievers like Jeurys Familia.
Led by Familia’s three blown saves, the Mets’ bullpen has had an inconsistent past week and a half. Gsellman also stumbled after inheriting an eighth-inning jam during a 4-3 loss to the St. Louis Cardinals on Thursday.
But appearing late in a tight game reflected the Mets’ growing confidence in Gsellman. His sinking fastball, clocked at an average of about 94 miles per hour, is moving more the way it did in 2016. His slider and changeup are improved. Opponents were hitting .216 against him entering the weekend. His 1.93 E.R.A. tied him with Familia for best on the team, and he has been called on to pitch multiple innings at a time or to come in for one batter with runners on base.
Unlike Matt Harvey, who is upset about his recent move from the starting rotation to the bullpen, Gsellman has embraced relieving.
“He literally runs off the mound saying, ‘Let’s go!’” Manager Mickey Callaway said. “It’s really fun to see a guy having fun out there and not putting pressure on himself to try and get back into the rotation. Just go out and do the job you’re supposed to do that day and embrace it.”
As a starter, Gsellman said he felt he needed to be subdued and regimented. He grew bored waiting five days for his next start. As a relief pitcher, he can throw harder, display more emotion and contribute more often.
“I get really fired up knowing that I wake up every day, ‘Damn, I’m playing today,’” he said.
The same applies to his video game habits. He still plays regularly, sometimes with Lugo and Syndergaard. But Lugo said Gsellman was not as good at the games as he pretends to be. “And you can quote me on that,” Lugo said.
Most important, though, when Gsellman gets in front of the television to play, he has made a critical change. “I just sit up more and keep my back straight,” he said.
