Lacrosse Casts Its Net Farther From the Coast, and Pulls In New Recruits
When my son was born, my in-laws, Long Islanders, showed up with a baby gift: a miniature lacrosse stick. As a Midwesterner, I had never seen one, but I figured it was the Northeast equivalent of putting a baseball glove in the crib.
What little I knew about the game came from acquaintances on Wall Street. Many of them had parlayed their stick skills at Ivy League or Mid-Atlantic colleges into personal connections that led to spots on trading desks, where it can be hard to swing a lacrosse stick without hitting a former attackman.
So it came as little surprise that the Ivy League chose New York to host its conference tournament this year. Yale and Cornell will meet at Lawrence A. Wien Stadium at Columbia in Sunday’s final. The league saw Columbia, and New York City, as a near-perfect laboratory to explore neutral sites for its season-ending event, which in previous years had been held on the home field of the regular-season champion.
Lacrosse’s definition of home turf, however, is expanding geographically as well as culturally. It is among the fastest growing sports in the United States, according to a recent Sport & Fitness Industry Association report, with participation increasing nearly 10 percent in 2017 and by 25 percent since 2012. Meanwhile, football participation has dropped nearly 16 percent and baseball has had just 2 percent growth over the past five years, according to the report.
Nearly 1.1 million boys and girls now play the sport in youth leagues, and the impact of this grass-roots growth has powered a westward expansion. Men’s programs like Denver, Notre Dame and Ohio State and women’s teams like Northwestern, Florida and Stanford are part of the national title conversation. Northwestern won seven women’s titles in eight years from 2005 to 2012, and in 2015 Denver became the first team from west of the Appalachian Mountains to capture the men’s title.
“There’s a window opened wide now like the one that I went through back in the late 1970s and 1980s,” said Tim Gordon, a managing director at Raymond James Financial, who played at Cornell, where he won an Ivy League championship and made the national semifinals before graduating in 1985.
“It was expanding, and colleges were looking beyond the boarding and private schools for players,” he said. “I was a Long Island kid, a son of a cop from a public school, and I could play. Now there’s more leagues, more teams, better players. It’s good for the sport. It’s good for the kids.”
At a recent benefit at the New York Athletic Club, it was clear that even the Wall Street-based lacrosse constituency had expanded its boundaries. There were men and women from Johns Hopkins and Goldman Sachs, of course, and the University of Virginia and Deutsche Bank, but there were also players with roots in New York City’s Public Schools Athletic League.
The sport remains predominantly white and affluent, but nonprofits like the one the former players had come to celebrate and support — CityLax — are having success bringing the game to underserved communities.
“I know most of us started with a whole lot more than these kids,” said the organization’s founder, Mat Levine, a Manhasset, N.Y., native who played at Williams College. “But we know how we fell in love with the sport, how much it meant to us and how many doors it opened for us throughout life.”
For more than a decade, CityLax has introduced and sustained lacrosse programs at nearly 70 New York City schools. It has put sticks in the hands of thousands of young people like Isa Khan. Khan acted like the teenage fan boy that he is when he sought an autograph and some conversation with Paul Rabil, a former Johns Hopkins star who plays for the New York Lizards in Major League Lacrosse. Rabil is widely considered among the best players in the world.
Khan first saw the sport as an eighth grader while walking through Bergen Beach, Brooklyn, and stopping to watch a game. He had just lost his brother to a drug overdose and was, by his own admission, lost. He was shy, overweight and not terribly athletic.
“I wanted to be part of a team, and it looked like a sport I could be good at,” Khan said. “But when I went to the store and saw the equipment and how it cost more than $100, I didn’t think it was achievable.”
By chance, Khan discovered CityLax was offering a summer clinic — equipment included — run by coaches culled from college lacrosse programs as well as Wall Street. The sessions were demanding. The coaches were relentless.
But Khan stayed with it. He went to every clinic CityLax offered and played for its club team. Now he plays attack for James Madison High School in Brooklyn, another program backed by CityLax. Last semester, he was honored as a scholar-athlete by the P.S.A.L. He has accepted an academic scholarship to St. Francis College in Brooklyn.
“When I first started playing, I could barely do a push-up or look someone in the eye,” said Khan, now a solid 5-foot-9, 185-pounder. “Now I have options and know that there are even more out there.”
