FANTASY PLAYS: A Week at Coors Field Perfect for Streaming
For the first time this season, we get a week full of Coors Field games. You'll want to load up on hitters from the Rockies, Angels and Brewers, while avoiding the pitchers in those matchups. Don't worry, though. Shohei Ohtani won't be facing the thin air of Colorado.
Let's take a look at players that can help you long-term, as well as those who worth streaming this week to take advantage of good matchups.
PLAYERS TO PICK UP
Tyson Ross, SP, San Diego (38 percent owned in Yahoo leagues) - Ross has looked like the Ross of old, as unlike Matt Harvey, his recovery from Thoracic Outlet Syndrome surgery has gone really well. The latest example came Tuesday night as he struck out nine batters over six innings, allowing one earned run and three walks. That's a typical Ross start. He's under-owned across the board, and has electric stuff that allows you to deal with the walks. He should be owned in all 12-team leagues.
C.J. Cron, 1B, Tampa Bay (38 percent) - He's a streaky player that provides little more than power for your lineup. However, in a league where you need a corner infielder, you can do worse. He has everyday playing time, and at-bats are an underrated aspect of fantasy baseball.
Jose Peraza SS, Cincinnati (56 percent) - From severely overdrafted last year, to underdrafted this year, Peraza seems to be turning a corner. He doesn't walk or strike out much, but he will steal bases, which are always a sought-after category. He has the highest hard contact rate of his career, and his batting average on balls in play (BABIP) lines up with his batting average. He's a good Corey Seager replacement.
Jacob Faria, SP, Tampa Bay (39 percent) - Sure, he's had two bad starts on the season - in Boston and in Baltimore - but other than that, Faria has pitched similarly to his breakout 2017 season. He's available in far too many leagues and the perfect pitcher to use in home starts while avoiding him in road games.
TWO-START PITCHERS TO STREAM
Sean Newcomb, SP, Atlanta (27 percent) - Similar to Ross, if you can live with the walks, Newcomb can be a valuable asset. With two starts at Tampa Bay and at Miami, he's a borderline top 20 overall pitcher for the coming week.
Luis Castillo, SP, Cincinnati (66 percent) - Castillo's ownership plummeted after his one-inning meltdown two starts ago, but his start Wednesday against the Brewers showed why he needs to stay on your roster and in your lineup (seven strikeouts and two runs allowed in six innings). His velocity is down from a season ago, but with an average velocity of 96.2 mph on his fastball, he's still one of the hardest throwers in the game — and he has a lights-out changeup. Castillo is a good play against the Mets and injury-depleted Dodgers.
Fernando Romero, SP, Minnesota (34 percent) - The rookie threw 5.2 innings of shutout ball in his debut Wednesday, and he looks poised to stick in the Twins' rotation. He's on the road in St. Louis and Anaheim, so he can be streamed in deeper leagues.
HITTERS TO STREAM
Kole Calhoun, OF, Los Angeles Angels (13 percent) - He has two games in Colorado. He'll also have three right-handers on the mound over the weekend when the Twins come to town.
Trey Mancini, 1B/OF, Baltimore (61 percent) - Mancini has been hot of late, and he has the pleasure of teeing off against the lowly Kansas City and Tampa Bay staffs next week at home.
Lucas Duda, 1B, Kansas City (12 percent) - For those in deep leagues looking for a streamer, Duda gets six right-handers on the slate for next week. For his career, 118 of his 141 homers have come against righties.
___
This column was provided to The Associated Press by the Fantasy Sports Network, http://FNTSY.com
