David Fizdale Is Totally Going to Save the Knicks
The Knicks have a new coach! Or rather, of course they do.
It’s a rite of spring for a team that more often resembles a cargo cult than an N.B.A. franchise. As the Cavaliers and the Warriors and the Celtics and the Rockets soldier on playing playoff games, the Knicks fire someone and proclaim a new savior.
Last year, I drove up to the Knicks’ compound in Greenburgh, N.Y., as they introduced us to Scott Perry, the new general manager, who seems like a nice fellow. The year before that, it was Jeff Hornacek, the amiably bland new coach. And the year before that. …
I truly don’t want to sound sour. No, no. The new new coach, David Fizdale, is by most accounts a bright and personable man, an analytically sound hoops savant. The great LeBron James describes him as akin to a player whisperer. He worked a little magic as the rookie coach of the Memphis Grizzlies in the 2016-17 season before his team ran upon a reef of injuries and an aging star started to grumble and the coach was tossed into the roiling sea. He is well regarded by some of the best coaches in this league, such as the Warriors’ Steve Kerr and the Heat’s Erik Spoelstra.
Fizdale might turn the Knicks into a recognizable N.B.A. team, if he survives next season and the season after that. Organizational pathology has been the problem. The Knicks, whether out of despair or boredom, devour coaches. Fizdale will be the Knicks’ 12th coach in 18 seasons.
In 2015, Phil Jackson, of not terribly blessed memory, drafted Kristaps Porzingis. During a tenure as team president that was desultory in nearly every respect, this was Jackson’s single brilliant act.
Blessed with a spectacular talent, a 7-foot-3 hybrid of a shooting guard and a pterodactyl defender, most teams would craft a team and organizational philosophy around him. The Golden State Warriors built a magnificent jazz band around their transcendent point guard Stephen Curry. The Houston Rockets have crafted a score and score again machine around two great guards, James Harden and Chris Paul. The Philadelphia 76ers are building out from the twin foundation stones of Joel Embiid and point guard Ben Simmons.
These teams have mostly put an emphasis on finding prime coaching talents and leaving them alone.
The Knicks have traveled a different road, as gravel turns to dirt turns to a hazily indistinct foot path. In his rookie year, Porzingis was coached by Derek Fisher, who knew not so much about coaching and used a day off to travel to a party in Los Angeles, where he rumbled with his girlfriend’s ex-boyfriend. The Knicks fired Fisher and replaced him with Kurt Rambis, whose next success as a pro coach will be his first. He insisted that more or less everything Fisher had told Porzingis was wrong and that the Latvian should play closer to the basket.
Rambis was 9-19 in a mercifully abbreviated tenure. Jackson next brought in Hornacek, in whom some hoops aficionados claimed to divine an inspired offensive coach. You wait, those aficionados said, bye-bye triangle offense, Jeff is going modern N.B.A. offense.
This did not happen. Porzingis blew out his knee this season, and Hornacek coached out the remaining months as a Dead Coach Walking. The Knicks, in instinctively classy fashion, fired him in a rent-a-conference-room at Westchester County Airport at 2 a.m., just after the Knicks returned from their season finale in Cleveland.
Enter the Dragon.
James L. Dolan, the Knicks owner, has presided as the Grandmaster of Chaos that has been the Knicks for two decades now. Of late, the past few years, he made a show of proclaiming that he would lift his heavy hand, hire good people and let them do good things and all that.
Bravo, but not really. Less than a week after his managers tossed aside Hornacek, who, to his credit, mumbled nothing but pleasantries, Dolan talked to a New York Post writer and slipped a shiv in the ribs of the recently departed.
“I think Hornacek had the same kind of issue that Phil did in that he didn’t grasp how different the players are now in the way they think and deal with management and the coaches,” Dolan said. “I think he was way behind on that.”
Speaking of “way behind on that,” Dolan handed out $65 million in contracts to Jackson and Hornacek, a fact for which their wealth management teams are deeply grateful.
Even in the rubble of the Knicks, there are building materials to be found. The rookie point guard, the smooth-faced teenager Frank Ntilikina, showed flashes here and there of the instincts needed to guide a team, and he played surprisingly sturdy defense. Trey Burke, a midseason refuse heap find, looked as if he was capable of playing explosive minutes off the bench. They will have a lottery pick in the coming N.B.A. draft.
And there is Porzingis, who, inshallah, will return healthy at some point next season and resume his upward arc. Fizdale has talked of traveling to Europe to establish a relationship with the man who more than anyone else will determine his fate as coach of the Knicks.
As I’ve spent an unfortunate number of decades following this franchise, and my sons have obtained no return on years of passionate rooting, I wish Fizdale nothing but the best, just as I wish the Knicks’ management team nothing but patience with its new coach.
In that regard, a word about the unsettling rumors that the Knicks’ management harbors a daydream of trading on Fizdale’s Miami-born friendliness with James and attracting the great one to New York City this summer. This is like panning for gold in Central Park.
You can knock yourself out shaking that pan; ain’t nothing there but fool’s gold.
