Pitching Again After 3 (Three!) Tommy John Surgeries
Sometimes, the pinnacle of athletic achievement does not come with the bases loaded and the pennant on the line. Sometimes it comes in the regular season, on the road, when a left-hander trots out of the Tampa Bay bullpen and overcomes incalculable odds.
That is how it was in “The Rookie,” the film about Jim Morris, a high school teacher and coach who reached the majors in 1999. And that is how it was on April 25 for Jonny Venters, who returned to the majors after a 2,027-day absence, with an elbow that had undergone three Tommy John surgeries.
“It felt like I was making my debut again,” Venters said. “I had all the same nerves and excitement and anxiety.”
Venters retired the Orioles’ Chris Davis on a grounder in Baltimore that night, and has since tossed scoreless innings in Boston and Detroit. He once pitched like this with regularity, as an All-Star for the Atlanta Braves in 2011, when he led the majors in appearances with 85. He missed two weeks with an elbow impingement the next July, but helped the Braves reach the playoffs and pitched in the 2012 National League wild-card game.
That was Venters’s final appearance in the majors until last month. He underwent his second Tommy John surgery in 2013; his first was in 2005. Fifteen months into recovery, in 2014, Venters tore his rebuilt ligament again and needed a third Tommy John procedure. The Braves released him after that.
The 2015 surgery cost Venters a third full season. In 2016, after five appearances for a Rays’ Class A team, he needed another elbow surgery to reattach a ligament. While that operation was not officially Tommy John surgery, it sidelined him for the rest of that season.
“For him, since 2012, it’s just been setback after setback after setback,” said Braves reliever Peter Moylan, who was one of Venters’s teammates in Atlanta. “He’s had to fight and fight, and then it happens again.”
Moylan has dealt with similar medical misfortune: two Tommy John surgeries, a shoulder operation and three back surgeries. Moylan was a player-coach in the minors for the Braves in 2015 before re-establishing himself on the mound. To even have a chance after multiple breakdowns, he said, a pitcher cannot worry about recurrence.
“If you’re tentative and you’re not throwing the ball the way you should, then you’re not going to have the stuff to get back to where you need to be,” Moylan said. “You can’t throw 80 percent and get back to the big leagues. You’ve got to go all out and see if it’s going to work.”
For Venters, it just never seemed to work. Even last season, when he pitched at four levels in the Rays’ farm system, he worked only 23⅓ innings. But the Rays kept giving him chances, and Venters kept his perspective. He lived with his wife and three children near the Rays’ complex in Port Charlotte, Fla., reported for rehabilitation work in the morning and returned to his family at night.
“There’s a lot of people going through a lot worse things,” Venters said. “I’m trying to play a game for a living.”
For Venters, 33, a major league career was unlikely all along. He signed as a 30th-round draft choice in 2003, out of Indian River Community College in Florida, and took seven years to reach the Braves. He nearly gave up after the 2016 surgery, he said, but persisted because of support from his family — and a lack of more appealing career options.
“I actually had a lot of time to think about that, but this is all I’ve ever known,” Venters said. “I thought about coaching. That would be a possibility. But there was never anything that I wanted to do other than this, to be honest with you. It’s all I know. There was no real great backup plan. There was a little bit of desperation in there, too. Backed into a corner.”
At his best, Venters frustrated hitters with a hard, sinking fastball at around 95 miles per hour. He has lost two or three m.p.h. since his All-Star peak — “My stuff’s not as life-y as it used to be,” he said — but he still throws hard enough, with enough moxie, to compete. According to Fangraphs, Venters is believed to be only the second pitcher with three documented Tommy John surgeries to return to the majors, after Jason Isringhausen.
“It surprises me that anybody would have that perseverance, to go through what Jonny went through,” said Brian Snitker, the Braves’ manager, who coached for Atlanta when Venters played there. “He needs to write a book or hire himself out as a motivational speaker or something. And now his boys are old enough to know what went on and see Dad pitch. So that’s really cool, because he’s such a wonderful kid.”
Venters and his wife, Viviana, had only one child when he last pitched in the majors. Now they have three: their sons, Wyatt and Walker, and a newborn daughter, Evie. The boys, at least, may be old enough to remember their father's major league career, however long it continues. 
The marks on Venters’s body are evidence of a hard-won victory. 
“It’s the same scar, but it’s a little bigger now, it’s longer and a little fatter,” Venters said. “I have some scars over my legs where they took ligaments and put them in my elbow, too. But it’s starting to look a little bit more normal now.”
Sometimes the normal can be extraordinary.
When the Los Angeles Dodgers clinched a World Series berth at Wrigley Field last October, the final out found the glove of their shortstop. But it wasn’t Corey Seager, their regular starter at the position, who caught that line drive from the Chicago Cubs’ Willson Contreras. It was Charlie Culberson, who was playing there because a back injury had forced Seager to miss the National League Championship Series.
Now, the Dodgers will have to win again without Seager, and for a much longer stretch. Seager’s season is over because of an elbow injury that requires Tommy John surgery, and while it is easy to imagine a deal for Baltimore’s Manny Machado as a replacement, the Dodgers seem unlikely to trade premium prospects for a player facing free agency next winter. Besides, their problems run deeper than shortstop.
Consider the Dodgers’ roster for their World Series loss to Houston last fall. Of those 25 players, six are gone: Culberson, Yu Darvish, Andre Ethier, Brandon McCarthy, Brandon Morrow and Tony Watson. Five others were on the disabled list last week: Seager, Logan Forsythe, Rich Hill, Yasiel Puig and Justin Turner.
Four others had regressed significantly from their outstanding 2017 performances: Austin Barnes, Kenley Jansen, Chris Taylor and Alex Wood. Of the remaining players who returned and the newcomers, almost none have stood out. One new pitcher, Scott Alexander, has been sent to the minors, and another, Tom Koehler, has been injured.
It is fair to say that only three Dodgers players have exceeded expectations: catcher Yasmani Grandal; outfielder Matt Kemp, who arrived from Atlanta in a trade; and starter Hyun-Jin Ryu, a returning veteran who was not on the World Series roster. But Ryu, who is 3-0 with a 2.12 earned run average, landed on the disabled list after straining his groin on Wednesday.
So while injuries have been a factor for the Dodgers, collective underperformance has mattered more. The Arizona Diamondbacks have also dealt with injuries — to Jake Lamb, Robbie Ray, Steven Souza Jr. and Taijuan Walker — and they still have the N.L.’s best record. 
More and more athletes in recent years have added a suffix to the preferred rendering of their names (Jr., III and so on), even if their fathers were not well known or never played professionally. The latest to do it is Ronald Acuna Jr. of the Braves, though his father, at least, was almost famous — and almost a Met. 
Ronald Acuna Sr. played six seasons in the Mets’ minor league system, from 1999 through 2004, part of an 11-year pro career that also included stints with the Toronto and Milwaukee organizations, in the Venezuelan winter league and, for eight games in 2007, with the Long Island Ducks of the Atlantic League. Acuna Sr. peaked at Class AA, but not for lack of talent.
“He had a lot of tools, and he could do a little bit of everything,” said Jim Duquette, who was the Mets’ general manager in 2004. “We thought he’d be a big leaguer, and we held on to him for a long time.”
Acuna Sr. had excellent speed, averaging 29 steals per year in the Mets’ system, and a strong arm. Internally, Duquette said, the Mets believed Acuna could be similar to Raul Mondesi, the longtime major league outfielder, as long as he developed power.
But Acuna Sr. hit just five home runs in nearly 1,800 career at-bats in Class AA. Acuna Jr., a left fielder who was considered the majors’ best prospect before his promotion last month, hit 21 homers in three levels of the minors last season.
“The power tool apparently skips a generation,” Duquette said, adding that concerns about work ethic also held back Acuna Sr.
“We didn’t want to reward a guy by sending him to Triple-A when he wasn’t working hard,” he said. “We thought that was a bad message to send, and we also thought it could be motivation. But Double-A was his major leagues, and getting out of Double-A is the great equalizer. The good players get to Double-A, and then the best move on from there.”
Acuna Jr. soared through Class AA, spending just 57 games there last season, compared with 485 for his father. Acuna Jr., who is from Venezuela, believes his brothers could join him in surpassing their father’s highest level.
“He’s very proud to have his first son in the big leagues,” Acuna Jr. said in New York on Tuesday, through an interpreter. “There’s three more, so we’re hoping to have four in the big leagues altogether.”
At 6 feet 3 inches, the Milwaukee Brewers’ Josh Hader is seven inches shorter than the Hall of Famer Randy Johnson. But as a left-hander with a three-quarters delivery and a wicked slider and fastball, Hader is similarly terrifying for hitters. On Monday, Hader did something no pitcher has done since Johnson.
In a game against the Cincinnati Reds, Hader recorded the major leagues’ first eight-strikeout save since Johnson did it for Seattle in 1996, when a back injury limited him to bullpen work. Johnson would double that total in an unusual relief appearance on July 19, 2001, that earned a win for him and the single-game record for strikeouts by a reliever, with 16.
The game had begun the night before, with Curt Schilling starting for Arizona in San Diego. Electrical explosions in a light tower at Qualcomm Stadium caused the game to be suspended in the third inning. When the Padres arrived at the ballpark to resume the game the next day, they learned Johnson would be taking over for Schilling.
“I remember thinking, ‘Oh great, instead of being a bullpen game, it’s going to be a Randy Johnson game,’” said Philadelphia Phillies broadcaster Ben Davis, then a catcher for the Padres. “Curt Schilling and Randy Johnson in the same game, talk about a two-headed monster.”
Schilling had allowed no hits, and Johnson extended the no-hitter into the eighth inning, losing it on a two-out single by Wiki Gonzalez. Johnson set the relief strikeout record by fanning Davis to end the game. In his career off Johnson, Davis was 1 for 15 off with 11 strikeouts, though the one hit was a home run.
“I did hit the home run, which is the only thing I remember; I don’t remember all the strikeouts,” Davis said, laughing. “But for Randy to do it with two pitches — 98 mile-an-hour fastball and a 92 mile-an-hour slider — you thought, ‘Well, it’s a 50 percent chance.’ But he didn’t just throw hard, he could locate as well, and from his arm angle and release point, he was throwing from like 50, 51 feet when he got done.”
Johnson kept on going that season, of course, beating the Yankees three times in the World Series to lift the Diamondbacks to their only championship. Including the postseason, Johnson was 26-7 with a 2.36 earned run average in 2001 — and a mind-bending 419 strikeouts.
