Rebekah Mercer Puts a Museum’s Credibility at Risk
Museums are vital cultural institutions. They provide a glimpse into the past, a record of what once was and an exploration of how the present came to be. They are social cornerstones, shaping public opinion in subtle yet profound ways.
In a world increasingly dominated by fake news, museums should stand as sanctuaries of truth and science. To do so, a natural-history museum must be accurate, faithful to the facts and trusted by the public. This is why it is so troubling that Rebekah Mercer continues to sit on the board of trustees of the American Museum of Natural History.
Ms. Mercer and her family were important backers of President Trump. She has a stake in Breitbart News, and the family foundation has contributed millions of dollars to climate-change-denying politicians and organizations like the Heartland Institute, which says, “Global warming is not a crisis” and “There is no need to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and no point in attempting to do so.” According to the Mercer Family Foundation’s tax reports, it gave the Heartland Institute nearly $5.9 million from 2008 to 2016, more than the $4 million it donated to the American Museum of Natural History during that period.
Other climate-denial groups have also benefited from the Mercers’ largess. According to the foundation’s most recent tax filing, for 2016, obtained by the Climate Investigations Center, those groups include the CO2 Coalition, $150,000 (“We are persuaded that the net effects of increasing CO2 will be very good for the world,” the group says); the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, $125,000 (“It is highly unlikely that future increases in the air’s CO2 content will produce any global warming,” according to the group); and the Oregon Institute for Science and Medicine, $200,000 (“several” members of its staff are “well known for their work” promoting a petition whose signatories are scientists “opposed, on scientific grounds, to the hypothesis of ‘human-caused global warming,’” the institute’s website says).
These organizations are in clear conflict with the virtually unanimous international scientific consensus on climate change.
We cannot say that Ms. Mercer and her family foundation are dictating museum exhibitions by virtue of her board seat, and the museum, in a statement, has said that she is not and that “its funders do not shape its curatorial decisions.” But that’s not really the issue. As a funder of climate-science disinformation, Ms. Mercer stands in direct contradiction to the museum’s mission “to discover, interpret, and disseminate — through scientific research and education — knowledge about human cultures, the natural world, and the universe.”
Let’s be clear: This is not about partisan politics; it’s about mission alignment and truth. A financier of climate denialism does not belong in a leadership position at a science museum.
We have signed on to a letter with a group of other scientists worried that Ms. Mercer’s membership on the board presents the museum with a significant reputational risk. We were inspired by a similar campaign against a former museum board member, the conservative billionaire David Koch, who left the board when his term ended in 2015.
With over 400 signatories, including Nobel laureates, the letter we signed urges the museum to stand strong as a voice of science and remove Ms. Mercer from the board. Twenty-eight curators at the museum also recently signed a letter in which they expressed “profound concern” over Ms. Mercer’s presence on the board because the groups she has helped fund “directly contradict the museum’s mission and impede our ongoing efforts to educate the public about the science of past and future climate change.”
For years, many scientists were hesitant to come out of their labs and speak up for fear that truth-telling would result in personal attacks or threaten their professional credibility. Mr. Trump’s election and the appointment of so many science deniers to positions of power in his administration have put that era behind us. Last year more than one million scientists and their supporters are estimated to have taken to the streets around the world in the March For Science.
Climate-denying politicians have served as willing accomplices to industry special interests seeking to silence science that stands in the way of their commercial agenda. Time and again, that has meant sacrificing the public good for private profit. Silence supports the status quo, a status quo that allows fossil fuel companies to profit from the continued destruction of our climate and the suffering of people the world over.
As for the Mercer family’s donations to the museum, we suggest those funds be used to develop exhibitions and programs that educate the public about the climate-denial machine, that illuminate its history of using propaganda to obstruct pro-climate action and that document how we’ve arrived at this current crisis point for the planet.
Ms. Mercer has spent millions to discredit science. As scientists, we can’t allow that to continue unchallenged. This is why it’s so important to remove Rebekah Mercer from the board of the American Museum of Natural History. The public needs to trust its museums, and as a sponsor of fake news and climate disinformation, she erodes that trust.
