Teaching Activities for: ‘Obama Portraits Blend Paint and Politics, and Fact and Fiction’
Before reading the article:
Look closely at the portraits of the former first lady Michelle Obama and President Barack Obama, above. What details do you notice in each portrait? What is your impression of each, and why?
Now, read art critic Holland Cotter’s review, “Obama Portraits Blend Paint and Politics, and Fact and Fiction,” and answer the following questions: 
1. Where were the portraits unveiled on Feb. 12? Who are the artists who painted each of the portraits?
2. What details does the article give about the National Portrait Gallery collection? Who is featured in the gallery and how is the gallery arranged?
3. What is special about the background in Mr. Obama’s portrait as well as his facial expression?
4. Why was Mrs. Obama’s choice of Amy Sherald surprising, according to the article? What details does the article give about Ms. Sherald’s background?
5. How do the artists blend fact and fiction in their portraits?
6. What point about portrait placement does the Times art critic Holland Cotter make at the end of his article, and why?
7. Do you agree with this critic’s assessments? Why or why not?
Finally, tell us more about what you think: 
Glance through the National Portrait Gallery’s America's Presidents page, which includes a Spanish translation option. Scroll through from the first presidents until today, and then decide:
• What portraits are your favorites, and why do you like them?
• What is strikingly different about the Barack Obama portrait at the top of this lesson from previous presidential portraits, and why?
For related Times coverage of the Obamas’ reactions to their portraits, see “Obama Portraitists Merged the Everyday and the Extraordinary.” For interviews with the artists, see “Kehinde Wiley on Painting the Powerless. And a President.” and “After a Late Start, an Artist’s Big Break: Michelle Obama’s Official Portrait.”
For a related Learning Network lesson, see “What Do You Think of the Obamas’ Portrait Choices?”
