How Does a Political Reporter Write a Memoir? First, Read Books. A Lot of Books.
When I first mentioned my idea of writing a memoir to David Carr, he told me that I needed to “visit a foreign land where writers live.”
“That bag of tricks of journalism — anecdote, blah bidy blah, flick of the smarty pants here and there, juicy quote, more blah bidy blah, which you and I own and know, is no help here,” The Times’s beloved media columnist emailed me weeks before he died.
Three years later when I sat down to write my first book — a memoir about how covering Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaigns consumed the formative years of my 20s and 30s — I wished I could ask David what he meant by that foreign land. How did I get there?
I’ll never know exactly what he would have said, but I found my magic carpet in books.
I’ve always been a voracious reader. Growing up in San Antonio, I was the dork at the Friday night football games with my head buried in a book — Jack Kerouac or Oscar Wilde, years before I really understood them. As my neighbors moved lava lamps and glass bongs and Foo Fighters posters into their college dorm rooms in Austin, I unpacked the Brontë sisters boxed set and a vintage edition of “The Bell Jar.” Pretentious? Let’s just say I didn’t get invited to a lot of frat parties. But that was who I was.
Or at least that was who I thought I was until I became a political reporter. Suddenly, the only poetry I thought about came in the form of political speeches. The only symbolism came in schlocky campaign ads. “The classics” meant Richard Ben Cramer’s “What It Takes,” David Foster Wallace’s “Up, Simba!” (plus glossary), Hunter S. Thompson’s “Fear and Loathing: On the Campaign Trail ’72” and Timothy Crouse’s “The Boys on the Bus.” I mixed in more obscure volumes, like “Nixon Agonistes: The Crisis of the Self-Made Man,” by Garry Wills, and every (credible) book about the Clintons (sorry, Ed Klein).
I read contrived memoirs by presidential candidates. For every “Dreams From My Father,” Barack Obama’s honest, literary portrayal of his biracial upbringing, there were a dozen cautious, formulaic vanity projects by politicians. They had names like “A Time for Truth” (Ted Cruz), “American Dreams” (Marco Rubio), “Our Revolution: A Future to Believe In” (Bernie Sanders) and “Hard Choices” (Hillary Clinton). Sitting alongside these titles on my bookshelf was the parody “Some New Beginnings,” by Selina Meyer, the fictional fumbling vice president on HBO’s “Veep.”
But mostly, my reading diet consisted of Twitter and Politico. Buried in the crush of keeping up with the day’s news while on the campaign trail, I entirely lost the reader I’d once been. I listened to audio books on the road, but it wasn’t the same as curling up with a good book. And when I did have a layover at the airport or a couple of hours of downtime in a Hilton Garden Inn, I preferred to stare at my phone in a meditative state than read anything substantial.
So when I went on book leave last February and sat down to try to get newspaper writing out of my head and travel to this mythical place where writers lived, I considered part of the job reconnecting with my reading self. Book leave wouldn’t just be about writing a book; it would also be about reading books. And not just reading for research purposes but trying to reconnect with my previous, ravenous, bookworm self.
For nine months, I would wake up early, sitting down in front of that terrifying blank page by 7 a.m., always fueled by an iced red eye. (Somewhere around Chapter 27, I found out I was pregnant and cut back to a single drip coffee — worried our baby would come out addicted to La Colombe’s cold brew with a shot of espresso.) I’d write until 12:30 p.m. or 1 p.m. and then venture outside to get lunch. The afternoon was for reading, both the pages I’d written and the pages that the real Writers, the ones who seemingly knew how to do this, had published.
Book leave may sound like a spa retreat in Arizona compared with a campaign bus in Ohio, but I had a hard time adjusting. I’d gone from traveling the country with Mrs. Clinton surrounded by other reporters, campaign staff, voters — all against the backdrop of “Fight Song” — to sitting in the same silent (except for the occasional sledgehammer from a neighbor’s renovation) spot at our dining room table by myself all day every day. I’d been so driven by the instant gratification of a byline. Now I slaved away on something that quite possibly no one (except my mom) would read.
In those early weeks, I only allowed myself to read books that would help with my “day job”: cranking out the 100,000 words I was contractually obligated to deliver to HarperCollins by the fall. That meant mostly sticking to memoirs, studying the structure and voice that other — real — memoirists used. I read Richard Ford’s “Between Them,” a slim volume about his parents; “Stop-Time” by Frank Conroy; “Dispatches” by Michael Herr; all of Mary Karr’s books (including rereading “The Liars’ Club” and “Cherry”). I read Ms. Karr’s essential guide, “The Art of Memoir,” and Stephen King’s “On Writing.” (Stephen, if you’re reading this, please update your advice about not watching TV while book writing to the Twitter era, because you seem to spend a lot of time there.)
I devoured Nora Ephron’s “I Feel Bad About My Neck” while sitting at the salon feeling bad about my roots. I read Joan Didion’s “South and West” (even her rough notes were better than anything I could ever hope to write) and Sherman Alexie’s “You Don’t Have to Say You Love Me,” his gut-wrenching, lyrical, personal story about growing up on the Spokane Indian Reservation. That made me want to reread “The Toughest Indian in the World.” God, I love Sherman Alexie. Paul Auster’s “The Invention of Solitude” took longer to get through. Cheryl Strayed broke my heart with “Wild” and then lifted me back up off the floor with “Tiny Beautiful Things.”
Sometimes book reading and book writing would clash — two parts of my brain in conflict on the page. After reading Dave Eggers’s “A Heartbreaking Work of Staggering Genius,” I stupidly thought I too should type up self-indulgent, 5,000-word riffs about, say, finding an apartment in New York or taking surf lessons while on assignment with the Obamas in Hawaii, things that had little to do with the larger story. But it didn’t take an editor to tell me that there was nothing staggering or genius about my attempts at Mr. Eggers’s stream of consciousness.
From there, I drifted into fiction, still studying voice and structure as I thought about how to craft my own book, “Chasing Hillary: Ten Years, Two Presidential Campaigns, and One Intact Glass Ceiling” (due out April 24, just in case you want to join my mom and pre-order). I became wrought with insecurity that these masters could do what I (the yeoman newspaper reporter) could never do. I wanted to retreat back to my usual “flick of the smarty pants” stories, accepting I’d been too bathed in newsprint to ever emerge a Writer.
I read William Styron’s “Sophie’s Choice,” a story I’d heard about for years but didn’t really understand until I read it; “Stay With Me,” a beauty of a first novel by the Nigerian author Ayobami Adebayo; “Annie John” by Jamaica Kincaid and — right before a canoeing trip in West Texas — James Dickey’s “Deliverance.”
My mind was blown by Junot Díaz’s “The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao.” I know, I know, that book came out a decade ago and blew everybody’s minds. But I was most likely on a campaign bus in Iowa at the time and hadn’t noticed.
The writing part never got easier, but books made my days less lonely. I spent mornings in my own head but the afternoons were for Yunior and Lola and Oscar and Sherman and Toph — and just like that I was back in the football stands with Dean Moriarty and in my dorm room in Austin with Esther Greenwood.
