Do Trump’s ‘Approval’ Numbers Tell Us About Him, or About Us?
Every few weeks, an email arrives from the Republican National Committee, requesting my attention to a matter of great national consequence. “Approval Poll Response: PENDING” is the subject line of the latest. “The President has asked us to reach out to some of our top supporters for a one-question poll,” it begins. “The President’s job performance has been ...” There are four possible responses: “great,” “good,” “O.K.” or “other.”
“Thank you for your input, Friend,” the email concludes. “We’ll be sure to pass it along to President Trump.”
What makes these emails unusual is the attention they pay not just to flattering their recipients (standard in fund-raising harangues) but also to flattering their subject. You get the sense that the R.N.C. really might pass the results of this most rigorous poll on to the president — who is, as anyone at the mercy of his Twitter account knows, the country’s most enthusiastic consumer of polls about Donald Trump.
“Any negative polls are fake news,” he tweeted last February, after a CNN/ORC International poll found that he’d begun his presidency with an approval rating of just 44 percent. (George W. Bush started at 58; Barack Obama at 76.) When a Twitter account that had previously circulated actual fake news promoted a dubious Twitter poll claiming 61 percent of respondents preferred Trump to Obama, he retweeted it. In June, when Rasmussen Reports, a pollster known for its Republican-friendly findings, showed Trump’s approval numbers clearing 50 percent for the first time, the president tweeted: “That’s higher than O’s #’s!” (It wasn’t.) In December, when a Rasmussen poll really did find his approval within a point of Obama’s, he crowed, “and this despite massive negative Trump coverage & Russia hoax!”
But it is the Gallup poll that remains Trump’s great unrequited love. Nearly every day since the presidency of Harry Truman, the opinion-research firm has asked a scientific sampling of the American electorate the same question: “Do you approve or disapprove of the way [name] is handling his job as president?” And over the past year Gallup has found Trump, with unpitying consistency, the least-approved-of president in the history of its polling. In mid-February, his numbers ticked back up, to 40 percent — but that is still well short of the 57 percent who disapprove of him.
He is not the first modern president to obsess over these ratings, but the nature of his obsession is different. Presidents from Lyndon Johnson to George W. Bush spoke bluntly about approval as a means to an end. For Trump, approval seems to be the end. His primary pre-presidential business was, quite literally, being popular, and now that he is in the White House, mass approval is the one thing that is consistently denied to him. There is something oddly poignant about the R.N.C. email polls; they’re like the birthday card that a middle manager hustles the hourly employees to sign for a company president who everyone knows has just gone through a rough divorce.
What’s most bizarre about this particular manifestation of Trump’s exhausting, relentless need for external affirmation, though, is how ill placed it is. No president has ever been so publicly consumed with his approval numbers. And no president has ever had less reason to care about them.
What does it mean, exactly, to “approve” of a president? Does it mean you like Trump enough that, if there were an election tomorrow, you would vote for him? Does it mean that you like him personally? Or does it mean that you don’t like him personally but think that he’s handling affairs of state well enough anyway?
We have George Gallup, the originator of the Gallup poll, to thank for this ambiguity. An Iowa-born journalism professor and advertising consultant, Gallup spent years pondering what question might best assess presidential performance — separating it, in the minds of poll respondents, from considerations like voting preference and personal affinity — before arriving in 1945 at the wording Gallup and other pollsters have used ever since. Frank Newport, Gallup’s current editor in chief, explains that the “approve or disapprove” question is expansive by design. “When you vote, you have an up or down choice on a candidate, right?” he told me. “You don’t have a nuanced choice.” Or, as Gallup himself put it in 1940, in a sort of civics-class koan, “the limitations and the shortcomings of the polls are the limitations and shortcomings of public opinion itself.”
This rankled Daniel J. Boorstin, the conservative historian and social critic, who criticized Gallup in his 1962 book, “The Image.” Boorstin described public-opinion research as “a kind of pseudo-event, forced into existence for the primary purpose of being reported” — an unreal thing with real consequences. What “approval” measures in a presidency may be hard to pin down, but what it gets you is not: Higher numbers have historically meant more effective dealings with Congress — whose leaders read approval polls as a measure of their leverage with the president — and better chances of re-election.
And yet there is a wealth of research showing that “approval” is largely, if not entirely, beyond a president’s control. In 2002, the political scientists Robert S. Erikson, Michael B. Mackuen and James A. Stimson found that more than half of the variance in a president’s approval ratings could be explained by either the performance of the national economy or by big events like international crises, assassination attempts and scandals — factors over which a president may not exert much influence at all. Jimmy Carter gained 20 points when Iranian student demonstrators occupied the United States Embassy in Tehran. Ronald Reagan picked up seven after being shot.
None of this has dissuaded presidents from trying to influence their own approval ratings. Reagan was the first to bring a public-opinion expert, Richard Wirthlin, onto the White House team. Wirthlin’s firm went on to test public opinion for George H.W. Bush in the lead-up to the Persian Gulf war; Dick Cheney, at the time Bush’s defense secretary, would later grumble in his memoirs that Colin Powell, then the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “seemed more comfortable talking about poll numbers than he was recommending military options.” As the war approached its conclusion, crowds of supporters were ushered onto the White House lawn with signs trumpeting Bush’s approval rating: “WE ♥ GEORGE — 91%.”
The war crystallized fears of what the political scientists Paul Brace and Barbara Hinckley described, in the 1992 book “Follow the Leader,” as “a public-relations presidency: a pattern of action in the White House that gives high priority to public support.” (The idea had enough popular credence in the 1990s to serve as the premise for the 1997 film “Wag the Dog,” in which an administration fakes an entire war to rally the masses.) There was, Brace and Hinckley warned, a tension between a genuinely successful presidency and a momentarily popular one — “an uneasy balance at best between being liked and being president.”
Trump might seem like the logical conclusion of the public-relations presidency, but he complicates the idea at least as much as he confirms it. For someone who cares so singularly about approval, he almost never pursues it in any rational fashion; he routinely does the opposite of what a majority of the electorate claims to want, from leaving the Affordable Care Act alone to logging out of his Twitter account. And Trump’s low approval numbers, which could easily have been a death sentence for another president’s agenda, have not much impeded his legislative progress. Taking stock of this, a recent Politico headline asked, “Has Trump made approval polls meaningless?”
A more plausible explanation is that the diminished meaning of political approval is what made Trump. Partisanship has always factored heavily into presidential approval, but in recent decades it has come to eclipse all other variables in Gallup’s data. The last president to hold more than 40 percent approval from opposition-party voters in the early days of his presidency was George H.W. Bush. In his first three months in office, Trump received the lowest-ever approval rating among opposition-party voters (9 percent) and the third-highest-ever among his own partisans (87 percent). In a Huffington Post poll in April, 40 percent of respondents — 63 percent of those who disapproved of Trump and 24 percent of those who approved of him — said there was almost nothing Trump could do to change their minds about him.
This question becomes less and less hypothetical every time Trump barrels through another taboo that previously bound the modern American presidency: firing an F.B.I. director who was investigating him, hesitating to censure white supremacists, casually accusing his critics of treason. Trump sees an approval rating maddeningly stuck around 40 percent, while most of the country — 57 percent of it, if you credit Gallup — wonders: Really, still 40 percent? These numbers used to seem to say something, however vague, about a presidency and where it was headed. Now they tell us something about us, and it is maybe more than we would like to know.
