Missing Conservatism? Just Wait for a Democratic President
With President Trump’s support, Republican majorities in both chambers of Congress recently enacted an enormous increase in government spending, reversing the only major policy victory of Tea Party insurgents in 2011. Given this blasphemy, where is the conservative revolt?
The typical conservative cycle runs from backlash to embrace to disappointment — and we are right on schedule. After opposing government expansion and social change under Democratic presidents, conservatives typically give new Republican presidents the benefit of the doubt. By the time of the next counterattack against a new Democrat, historical revisionism sets in: Republican leaders are seen as part of the problem, being too accommodating to liberalism and selling out their principles.
The cycle is born of the infeasibility of conservative goals, especially the American right’s attempt to reverse the growth of the welfare and administrative state (which even the world’s most right-wing parties accept) and its tendency to start unwinnable culture wars against inevitable change (a typical conservative foible). The public shares conservatives’ broad desire for limiting government growth and social upheaval, but that does not translate into support for specific policies to achieve those goals. The international and historical norm is that the size and scope of government grow over time and new social changes are codified; conservative resistance slows this liberal policy drift but does not reverse it.
Each conservative cycle begins with a backlash against liberal acceleration. Just as in 2010, the midterm elections of 1966, 1978 and 1994 brought Republican surges reacting to the policies of new Democratic presidents. Each insurgency was more conservative than the previous version, but they lacked realistic and popular proposals to rein in government or reverse social change; they focused mostly on stopping Democratic action.
Following each backlash, new Republican presidents in 1969, 1981 and 2001 pleased conservatives with regulatory reversals and tax reform. But they were also given wide latitude to pursue compromise legislation that expanded government (including new social spending under Richard Nixon, job training under Ronald Reagan and prescription coverage under George W. Bush).
Each time, right-wing grumbling increased as Republican rule progressed. Mirroring the current role of the House Freedom Caucus, the Republican Study Committee in the 1970s and the Conservative Opportunity Society in the 1980s arose to refine hard-line positions and tactics. Organizing outside Congress also advanced, with the development of conservative think tanks, grass-roots groups and media outlets.
Late in each cycle, rightist rebellions set the stage for future attacks: Mr. Reagan’s 1976 nomination campaign, Newt Gingrich’s 1992 revolt against tax increases and the 2007 opposition to Mr. Bush’s immigration plan. Full-scale backlash waited for new Democratic presidents but came with reinterpretations of previous Republican records as failing conservatism.
Given Mr. Trump’s heterodox campaign and personal weaknesses, he faced earlier defections by intellectuals and administration veterans bothered by his racial and institutional views. But on policy, Mr. Trump’s first year gave conservatives little to complain about. The administration, staffed by hard-liners, rolled back liberal policies. Mr. Trump did not pursue any major new laws expanding government during his initial year (a first in the postwar era), enacting only a large tax cut.
When the Trump administration was widely praised at last year’s Conservative Political Action Conference, some saw it as a sign of conservatism’s defeat in an existential battle with populism. But one year later, conservative policy is largely advancing, and populism is waning. Conservatives won over by Mr. Trump’s moves on taxes, regulation and foreign policy are likely to overlook a deal on government spending (or blame it on the demands of Democrats). But he may eventually face the same fate as Mr. Bush, whose “big-government conservatism” was increasingly criticized as his presidency wore on.
Mr. Trump does not talk or act like previous Republican presidents, but he is facing the same fundamental difficulties translating symbolic conservative politics into coherent governance. The backlash that brought him to power is not so different from those his predecessors rode, nor is his inability to translate base grievances into policymaking.
But under Mr. Trump, Republicans have postponed inevitable compromises even more than usual. Administration budgets repeat right-wing fantasies and are promptly ignored by Congress and agencies. After promising infrastructure funding nearly every week, Mr. Trump has reiterated only his odd campaign demand for larger state and private investment in exchange for the same federal dollars. Compared with Mr. Bush or Mr. Gingrich, he shows little innovation in solving social problems with nongovernmental strategies.
But if history is a guide, conservatism will rise again under a new Democratic president — featuring the same concerns about overweening government, accelerating social change and American decline. Liberals will cry hypocrisy as Republicans complain about spending under a Democrat, but the pattern reflects the unique form that American conservatism takes: as a reactionary backlash rather than an alternative governing platform.
The conservative movement has perennially stimulated resistance to liberalism, frequently incorporating new cultural issues and voters. But conservatives have been unable to guide Republican presidents to implement a policy agenda beyond lowering taxes and building the military. Despite gaining working-class constituencies, Republicans are not offering tangible solutions to rural poverty, family breakdown, rising drug addiction or deindustrialization.
Yet Republicans should have no trouble reinterpreting the current moment. Even if Mr. Trump is encouraged today, he may later be accused of departing from orthodoxy. A future Mike Pence campaign can simultaneously sell the nationalist pride he shares with Mr. Trump, his disappointment at some betrayals of conservative principles and his commitment to finally follow through. The same plan of resurgence has worked for generations.
