The Politics of Waxing
Madame Tussauds opened its New York City outpost at 42nd Street and Eighth Avenue after the pornography theaters were shut down but shortly before the Sept. 11 attacks. One of 24 Madame Tussauds branches around the world, it has an admission fee of $37 — $12 more than MoMA or the Met — that you can get down to $29 if you buy tickets online in advance. 
As emphasized by docents in the elevator ride to its top floor, it also has two bars. “Electric Lemonade” sells for $9.95 and margaritas for $10, and drinks can be carried throughout the attraction, unlike at some of those other expensive New York institutions.
On a recent visit up there, a little kid was shoving his fingers up Lenny Kravitz’s nose. Two teenagers took a selfie with a replica of Johnny Depp that, perhaps deliberately, had seen better days. A family of three took turns getting selfies with Woody Allen. One older male visitor was posing next to Sofia Vergara, his arm hovering near her waist. Politely, he refrained from actually touching her. 
There are no rules for how visitors interact with the celebrity replicas at Tussauds. Even touching the figures’ hair, which studio artists in London painstakingly implant into heads strand by strand, is allowed. (The hair on President Trump’s head? A mix of human and yak. His eyebrows: squirrel.) “Who’s that?” one child asked his father, pointing at Bruce Willis.
“You may be able to follow the celebrities and get up close with them on Instagram and stuff like that,” said Christine Haughney, the regional head of marketing for Merlin Entertainments, the parent company of Madame Tussauds. “But here, you can actually get your photo taken with them.” 
There are five floors at the attraction, but the most notable recent addition to the array of more than 150 figures is not the figure of Romeo Santos or the immersive “4D Marvel experience.” 
Instead, what was striking were the black-and-white Time’s Up pins fastened to the glittering ball gowns of A-list replicas like Susan Sarandon and Anne Hathaway, and to the more casual attire of — who knows why — Justin Timberlake and Ed Sheeran. Representing the recent movement by women in Hollywood to end harassment and inequality in all industries, the Time’s Up pins speak for wax figures who, one hopes, can’t actually speak for themselves. 
This slight costume change is the result of what Ms. Haughney said is the secret sauce fueling Tussauds’ 300-year survival. “We always keep our fingers on the pulse and make sure that we’re staying up-to-date,” she said. 
The Oscars are coming up? Actresses get Time’s Up pins. Donald Trump decides to forgo a visit to the United States embassy in London? His wildly lifelike figure is staged outside of the embassy for him. Pope Francis travels to the United States for the first time? Madame Tussauds parades his waxwork through the streets of New York in a veneer-white, top-down convertible. 
The former “Today” anchor Matt Lauer is accused of sexual harassment by multiple women? His wax figure is quietly removed from Madame Tussauds. 
“Just with the nature of the news, we did take him off the floor for the moment,” Ms. Haughney said, about Mr. Lauer’s representation. “But it’s still a figure that we have here, of course. We just don’t have him on the floor right now.” (“Luckily we have not had to remove any of our figures in Hollywood due to scandals,” Helen Larimore, the marketing manager for Madame Tussauds Hollywood, wrote in an email; Dustin Hoffman, Quentin Tarantino, Michael Jackson and Marlon Brando still happily hold court out west.)
New York City-themed hallways lead into a “Ghostbusters” virtual reality experience that opened at the attraction in 2016, which is a little funny when you remember that New York is very much right outside. 
Above a plump wax figure of a city policeman, a backlit sign announces, “GOOD SERVICE” for all but two of 11 subway lines. It is one of the least realistic artifacts in the entire place, second only to the waxwork of Robert Pattinson, the “Twilight” actor, which looks more like Jean-Ralphio Saperstein from “Parks and Recreation.” 
A survivor of the French Revolution and a protégée of the physician and waxworks hobbyist Philippe Curtius, Marie Tussaud, born Anna Maria Grosholtz, brought a traveling roadshow of wax figures she had created through England between 1802 and 1835, after which she set up a permanent exhibition in London. (Notable characters including Benjamin Franklin and Voltaire sat for her back in the day.) 
When the museum burned down in 1925, firefighters saved the attraction’s on-site parrot, which, once revived, is said to have remarked to the crowd that had gathered, “This is a rotten business.” 
A waxwork of Sleeping Beauty first made in 1765 by Curtius, then recast from the original mold in 1989, was one of several bequeathed to Tussaud after Curtius’s death. It has left London for the first time to be exhibited beginning this month at the Met Breuer. Inside the waxwork is a steel mechanism, developed by Tussaud and her sons in the 1830s, that moves a breathing chest piece to give the appearance that the waxwork is actually breathing.
Madame Tussauds thrived in London throughout the 20th century, featuring an occasionally rotating cast of wax figures, including the royal family (central and extended), as well as an extensive Chamber of Horrors, where Adolf Hitler and Joseph Goebbels were on display. 
Hitler’s waxwork, a short distance from Mahatma Gandhi, was doused in red paint in 1933 by three men and one woman, who also hung a sign from the figure that read, “HITLER the MASS MURDERER.” In 2008, at the just-opened Berlin outpost of Madame Tussauds, Hitler was beheaded by the second visitor to ever step foot in the museum. 
Controversy about identity and politics visits Tussauds regularly. Though the dawn of the selfie era proved to be a boon for the brand, social media has also introduced its share of problems. (“Social sharing” is encouraged by docents; the preferred hashtag is “#famousfun.”) 
Last year, a wax figure of Beyoncé was taken off the floor temporarily after an outcry that she had been whitewashed, in both the literal and figurative senses. “We did a couple small outfit changes and we were able to fix the lighting,” Ms. Haughney said of the incident. 
After unveiling the rapper Nicki Minaj’s wax figure in Las Vegas in 2015, in which she posed on her hands and knees in a revealing outfit, guests immediately began posing for obscene photographs with the waxwork, forcing Madame Tussauds to release a statement that confirmed it would bring in more security and redesign the set.
Merlin Entertainments, which acquired the Tussauds brand in 2007 for $1.9 billion, reported lackluster attendance last summer to its attractions in Britain, which include the London Eye, after terrorist attacks in London. Earlier this month, the brand announced it had bounced back, reporting a 3.5 percent increase in global visitors to its 127 attractions worldwide. 
While Madame Tussauds New York and Madame Tussauds Hollywood declined to share daily attendance numbers, Ms. Larimore said that the Hollywood location, which is closed only one day each year, for Oscars Sunday, gets “hundreds of visitors daily.” (A competing, off-brand wax museum called “Hollywood Wax Museum” is only a few blocks down the street, and the admission is cheaper, though the Meryl Streep waxwork is far, far worse.)
In a time where the public has a more complicated relationship with celebrity than ever, and more male stars are outed for their indiscretions, what does the future hold for a brand so dependent on famous people as Madame Tussauds? Vloggers, reality stars and even Grumpy Cat — whose figure is terrifyingly animatronic — have their own waxworks at the attractions now.
“If there’s a massive celeb and it’s big news worldwide, that’s someone we’d probably need to look at and do,” Ms. Haughney said.
Fame moves quickly and is never certain. Can the melted wax keep up? 
While Tussauds is the largest network of waxworks museums in the world, it hardly holds a monopoly: in Baltimore, there is the Great Blacks in Wax Museum; in Paris, Montreal, Prague and Seoul, the Musee Grevin; the Heroes of Baseball Wax Museum is in Cooperstown, N.Y. 
A handful of notable wax museums have closed in recent years — in Buena Park, Calif., the Movieland Wax Museum (which was previously the largest wax museum the United States) in 2005; Ontario’s Criminals Hall of Fame Wax Museum in 2014. Yet, Tussauds’ most recent attraction opened as recently as last year, in New Delhi. 
“Waxworks have this simultaneous lifelikeness and deathlikeness,” Michelle Bloom, a professor of comparative literature and French at University of California, Riverside and the author of “Waxworks: A Cultural Obsession” (2003), said in a phone interview. “But a wax figure can pass for a living person at the same time that it’s very corpse-like. I think we’re drawn to both, really.” In Dr. Bloom’s book, she explores the cultural phenomenon of waxworks through art, film and literature.
“Their lifelikeness and yet — they’re not real! — means that we can do what we want with the figures,” she said. “A lot of Hollywood horror films and works of literature get to this perverseness. There is usually a male character who is enamored of or obsessed with the wax figure of a woman. It’s the ‘ideal woman’ who doesn’t talk and is literally malleable. He can control her. He can project his fantasy onto her.”
For Barkha Maurya, who was in town from India visiting the New York attraction with her husband, it was the fact that “the sculptures felt completely alive. Sometimes, we were confused if it was an actual person or a wax sculpture.” Her favorite figure was The Incredible Hulk.
That desire to trip down the uncanny valley has burgeoned an even stranger phenomenon in the era of the activist internet. Superfans of certain celebrities address petitions on sites like Change.org to Madame Tussauds, pleading for the institution to turn their favorite stars into inanimate blocks of carved wax. Given the limit of resources at Tussauds, not every plea is successful, but Ms. Haughney said that the attraction’s priority is “listening to the guests,” after all.
In 2015, Jennifer Nieves published a petition on Change.org asking Tussauds in New York to introduce a wax figure for the Bronx-born bachata star Romeo Santos. “It is by request and high demand that Romeo Santos truly deserves this wax figure to honor his great success,” Ms. Nieves wrote. “From his beloved smile, dance moves, skills, and smooth voice that drives all his Romeistas crazy he truly deserves a place at the Madame Tussauds in New York City.” 
The petition received over 7,000 signatures (a small amount by Change.org standards), and plans were put in place to bring Mr. Santos’s likeness to Tussauds.
“There were lots of tears,” Ms. Haughney said about the unveiling of Mr. Santos’s figure in July of last year. Ms. Nieves was invited to attend, and she met Mr. Santos and his wax replica, which is posed permanently with hands shaped into a heart. 
Another such petition, to reinstate Agatha Christie’s wax figure to the London Madame Tussauds, has been less successful. “We’re talking about the person who is still the best-selling author in the world, and whose books, nearly 40 years after her death, are still being made into popular movies,” said the petition’s author, Scott Wallace Baker, by phone from Australia. 
And who could forget “Wax Paul Now,” a viral campaign to bring Paul Giamatti’s likeness to the attraction? Not Madame Tussauds New York, which threw a Paul Giamatti-themed party on March 25 — and promised to cast him in wax if petitioners get 500,000 signatures.
Ms. Haughney said that who gets into the attraction and who gets booted, who the guests prefer and who goes out of fashion, is determined only by visitors’ preferences. “The most important thing is that we know what our promise is to our brand, as well as to the celebrities,” she said, adding that Mother Teresa — “who was just so in demand with guests” — was one of a small number of luminaries to decline to be waxed. “We would never do anything to jeopardize that. We’re very apolitical.” 
Dr. Bloom was skeptical. “There are a lot of organizations that say they’re apolitical,” she said. “Depicting Beyoncé as whitewashed, that’s political. Where you choose to position a figure, or not including a figure, that’s all quite political.” 
It’s tradition at Madame Tussauds for sitting presidents to be featured — President Trump, who has himself been accused of sexual assault by multiple women — is protected behind red velvet rope, and by a Tussauds staff member. Visitors are permitted to be photographed with him only under a staff member’s supervision. “There’s an opportunity for visceral on-site interaction,” Ms. Bloom said, “whether you want it or not.”
For the people who spent a Friday night in New York at a wax museum that provides a near uniform experience to two dozen other cities — like going to McDonald’s in Rome — it’s really not that serious.
The experience at Tussauds, it turns out, is actually defined by the guests who visit it. The unhinged selfies posted to Instagram (#famousfun) that inspire one’s followers to do double-takes — Wait, did Lauren meet Jon Hamm and not freaking tell me??? The act of reveling in or revolting against the absence of Mr. Giamatti or the inclusion of Mr. Allen. The fact that it’s the one place where the public has an automatic upper hand — whether appropriate or not — over the rich and famous. 
One day at Madame Tussauds Hollywood in mid-February, a group of friends scripted, staged and filmed a skit that ended in an extended grinding session with Betty White. A wax museum without people is ultimately much weirder and less fun to imagine than a wax museum crowded with them. 
On the way out of the Times Square attraction, into the cold, real-life version of New York that these tourists had, maybe, come to see, I asked Sherene Church, who was in town with her sister from Atlanta, if she felt that her visit represented a classically New York experience. 
“Oh, absolutely,” she said. “Everything about it was good.” 
A family of New Yorkers who had a mother visiting from Mexico were a little more reticent. A wriggling toddler sat on her father’s shoulders, telegraphing that she was more than ready to get back out onto the city streets.
Her mother, whose favorite figure that evening had been Michael Jackson, confirmed her daughter’s eagerness to leave. Did the little one have a figure she liked most? “Oh, no,” her mother said. “She’s afraid of all of them.” 
