Cynthia Nixon’s Campaign: No Experience Required?
To the Editor:
Re “Cynthia Nixon and the Age of Inexperience” (column, March 25):
Frank Bruni’s argument that our current “romance” with inexperienced political candidates degrades the importance of experience more generally reflects an erroneous view of politics in the United States.
His essay is a response to Cynthia Nixon’s decision to run in the Democratic primary against Andrew Cuomo for governor of New York, but his point reflects a division between those who believe that political experience is required to govern well and those who do not.
There is a long tradition in the United States of governance by people with nonpolitical experience. The reason is simple: In a representative democracy we, in some sense, govern ourselves. Politics is not a technical discipline for which esoteric knowledge is indispensable.
My problem with Donald Trump, for example, has nothing to do with his political inexperience and everything to do with his moral and intellectual incompetence. Governing requires wisdom, not technical expertise. It truly is not brain science.
JOHN DOUARD, BLOOMFIELD, N.J.
To the Editor:
Frank Bruni rightly points out the importance of experience in any profession, whether a plumber, doctor or, yes, even a politician, to do the job correctly. The clearest example of lack of experience is the debacle that is the Trump White House.
Cynthia Nixon is a wonderful actress and clearly civic-minded. But rather than run for Congress, Ms. Nixon is shooting for the big kahuna — governorship of New York State. We simply don’t need another person learning on the job. Cynthia, please, stay in your lane.
GERRI STEWART, MONTCLAIR, N.J.
To the Editor:
Frank Bruni cites a professor’s argument that “the downgrading of experience and devaluing of expertise can be explained partly by the internet.” It can also be explained at times by democracy — by the sense that inexperience in old, corrupt ways is exactly what we need.
Mr. Bruni is absolutely correct that experience in elected politics is vastly preferable to a novitiate stepping into a powerful role. But he is also absolutely wrong: When leaders are as out of step with democratic values as ours are in New York, it may well be that only an outsider can clean up the mess.
For a decade and more, top Senate, Assembly and executive branch officials have left office under a cloud of corruption, often on their way to prison. Andrew Cuomo’s administration has been out of the sunshine almost from the start.
So what are we going to do? Say that the Cynthia Nixons are too naïve and too inexperienced to do what’s needed, so let’s keep the tainted incumbents in place? I’m not going to sell out my values for such fatalism masquerading as realism.
RIK SCARCESARATOGA SPRINGS, N.Y.
The writer is a professor of sociology at Skidmore College.
To the Editor:
One measure of Cynthia Nixon’s strength as a candidate is how consistently vapid and silly the arguments against her candidacy are. “The Actress, the Governor and Performance Politics” (Big City column, March 21) is a case in point. Ginia Bellafante seems to argue that since the Zephyr Teachout candidacy in 2014 pressed Gov. Andrew Cuomo into adopting more progressive policies, we don’t need a gubernatorial candidate who actually and passionately believes in progressive policies.
One pauses in wonder at the cynicism of such a thesis, then moves on to the conclusion, where Ms. Bellafante suggests that Ms. Nixon’s having starred in a television show that glamorized New York City (“Sex and the City”) negates some 15 years of activism on behalf of the city’s least advantaged citizens.
Where to begin? All you really learn is that the discredited neoliberal old guard that made the Trump presidency possible has learned nothing.
STEPHEN WOOD, SEATTLE
