The Biggest Stories in American Politics This Week
From the administration’s return to a hard-line immigration policy to the escalating possibility of an international trade war, it’s been another busy week in Washington. Here are five of the biggest stories driving American politics. (And some additional links if you want to read further.) 
As the United States formally proposed tariffs on $50 billion worth of Chinese products, including flat-screen televisions, medical devices, aircraft parts and batteries, China countered with tariffs on $50 billion worth of American goods from states that overwhelmingly voted for President Trump. 
While advisers to the president initially tried to mitigate concerns over an impending trade war, Mr. Trump doubled down late Thursday by announcing that he would formally consider additional tariffs on $100 billion worth of Chinese products in response to China's retaliation. 
The escalating trade conflict may have given the administration additional motivation to move more quickly to resolve the North American Free Trade Agreement — another trade deal the president has consistently attacked. 
As Trade Conflict Escalates, U.S. and China Enter a Battle of Wills
How the China-U.S. Trade Conflict Unfolded, Blow by Blow
In Sparing Consumers Tariff Burden, Trump Hits Manufacturing
Starting Sunday and continuing through the week, Mr. Trump unleashed a series of fiery Twitter posts denouncing America’s “weak” border laws and vowing “NO MORE DACA DEAL.” And while Mr. Trump’s Twitter feed isn’t always an indication of federal policy, it paved the way for new policy proposals and announcements. 
On Wednesday, Mr. Trump issued a proclamation directing the Departments of Defense and Homeland Security to work with governors to deploy the National Guard on the southwest border to help combat illegal immigration. Mexican officials sharply criticized the plan to add troops. 
The president’s renewed anti-immigration fervor was in part inspired by news reports of a large group of migrants from Honduras traveling through Mexico to the United States. The caravan later began to splinter, although organizers said it would regroup.
‘All It Takes Is One Mistake’: Worries Over Plan to Send National Guard to Border
Trump’s Immigration Tweets Followed by Policy Plans to Match
‘You Hate America!’: How the ‘Caravan’ Story Exploded on the Right
Scott Pruitt, the head of the Environmental Protection Agency, remained under scrutiny over reports that he rented a condominium from the wife of a top Washington lobbyist. He paid $50 a night to stay in the Capitol Hill unit. 
At least five officials were reassigned or demoted, or requested new jobs, in the past year after they raised concerns about Mr. Pruitt’s spending and management, which included unusually large spending on office furniture and first-class travel, as well as requests for a bulletproof vehicle and an expanded 20-person protective detail.
Mr. Pruitt was already facing questions about his first-class travel at taxpayer expense over the past year. 
Growing Crisis Threatens Scott Pruitt, E.P.A. Chief, as Top Aide Eyes Exit
For Scott Pruitt, a Spotlight Shines on His Ethics, Not His E.P.A. Rollbacks
Mick Mulvaney, in his first congressional report as the acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, called on lawmakers to cripple the bureau’s power and independence. A longtime critic of the bureau, he has spent the last few months freezing the bureau’s enforcement activities and calling for it to be “more humble” in its work. 
At the Environmental Protection Agency, officials announced the agency’s widely expected intent to re-evaluate and probably roll back Obama-era rules requiring automakers to reach ambitious emissions and mileage standards by 2025. The agency also took steps to challenge California over its decades-old right to set its own air pollution rules, setting up another showdown between the state and the federal government. 
How U.S. Fuel Economy Standards Compare With the Rest of the World
Quietly, Trump Administration and California Seek Deal on Car Emissions
Consumer Bureau’s Chief Gives Big Raises, Even as He Criticizes Spending
Russia pressed Mr. Trump to meet with President Vladimir V. Putin after the tense exchange of diplomatic expulsions last week. Mr. Trump had floated the idea of meeting with Mr. Putin at the White House in a March 20 phone call, a Russian official said. At the time, Mr. Trump had told reporters that he expected to “be seeing President Putin in the not-too-distant future.” 
But on Friday, the Trump administration imposed sanctions on seven of Russia’s richest men and 17 top government officials, penalties designed to punish Mr. Putin’s inner circle for Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election and other global transgressions.
It was another indication that as Congress and much of the administration pushes for increased pressure in response to Mr. Putin’s aggressions, Mr. Trump continues to advocate good relations with his Russian counterpart. 
He Says He’s an Innocent Victim. Robert Mueller Says He’s a Spy.
Yulia Skripal Isn’t Asking for Russia’s Help, U.K. Says
