Trump and Macron’s State Dinner: The Guest List
The following is the guest list for the state dinner on Tuesday with President Emmanuel Macron of France, provided by the White House and edited by The New York Times.
____________
President Trump and the first lady, Melania Trump
President Emmanuel Macron of France and Brigitte Macron
Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and Jane Roberts
Vice President Mike Pence and Karen Pence
Speaker Paul D. Ryan and Janna Ryan
Senator Bill Cassidy of Louisiana, and Dr. Laura Cassidy
Senator John Kennedy of Louisiana, and Rebecca Kennedy
Representative Kevin McCarthy, House majority leader, and Judy McCarthy
Representative Ed Royce of California and Maria Royce
Gov. John Bel Edwards of Louisiana and Donna Edwards
Gov. Paul LePage of Maine and Lauren LePage
Jim Mattis, secretary of defense
Steven Mnuchin, secretary of the Treasury, and Louise Linton
Kirstjen Nielsen, secretary of homeland security, and Chad Wolf
Mike Pompeo, director of the C.I.A. and secretary of state nominee, and Susan Pompeo
Wilbur Ross, secretary of commerce and Hilary Ross
Surgeon General Jerome Adams and Lacey Adams
John J. Sullivan, the acting secretary of state, and Graciela Rodriguez
Thomas A. Shannon Jr., under secretary of state for political affairs
A. Wess Mitchell, assistant secretary of state for European and Eurasian affairs, and Elizabeth Mitchell
Jamie McCourt, American ambassador to France
John F. Kelly, White House chief of staff, and Karen Kelly
John R. Bolton, the national security adviser, and Gretchen Bolton
Larry Kudlow, director of the National Economic Council, and Judith Kudlow
Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump, senior advisers to the president
Stephen Miller, senior policy adviser to Mr. Trump
Sarah Huckabee Sanders, White House press secretary, and Bryan Sanders
Joe Hagin, deputy White House chief of staff
Christopher P. Liddell, deputy White House chief of staff for policy coordination, and Renee Liddell
Fiona Hill, presidential adviser on Russia and Europe, and Kenneth Keen
Florence Parly, French defense minister
Bruno Le Maire, French finance minister
Jean-Yves Le Drian, French minister for European and foreign affairs
Nicole Belloubet, the French justice minister
Jean-Michel Blanquer, French education minister
Gérard Araud, ambassador of France to the United States, and Pascal Blondeau, a photographer and Mr. Araud’s partner
Christian Cambon, French senator
Marielle de Sarnez, member of the French National Assembly
Gen. Benoît Puga, a top military adviser to Mr. Macron and chancellor of the Legion of Honor
Adm. Bernard Rogel, former chief of staff of the French Navy
Philippe Étienne, senior policy adviser to Mr. Macron
Barbara Frugier, international communication adviser to Mr. Macron
Aurélien Lechevallier, diplomatic adviser to Mr. Macron
Pierre-Olivier Costa, adviser to Mrs. Macron
Bernard Arnault, chairman of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the luxury goods conglomerate, and Hélène Arnault
Thierry Breton, chief executive of Atos, a French technology company
Tim Cook, chief executive of Apple, and Lisa Jackson, the company’s environmental director
Christian Dargnat, chief executive at BNP Paribas Asset Management
David Hamilton, a Chicago-based businessman, and Catharine Hamilton
Marillyn Hewson, chief executive of Lockheed Martin, and James Hewson
Henry Kravis, co-founder of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, the global investment firm, and Marie-Josée Kravis
Emmanuel Miquel, senior investment manager at Ardian, a French private equity firm
Rupert Murdoch, executive co-chairman of 21st Century Fox, and Jerry Hall
Dina Powell, financial executive at Goldman Sachs and former deputy national security adviser to Mr. Trump, and David McCormick
Virginia M. Rometty, chief executive of IBM, and Anthony Mark Rometty
John F. W. Rogers, executive vice president of Goldman Sachs, and Deborah Lehr
David M. Rubenstein, co-executive chairman of the Carlyle Group, and Gabrielle Rubenstein
Stephen A. Schwarzman, chief executive of the Blackstone Group, and Christine Schwarzman
Frederick W. Smith, chief executive of FedEx, and Diane Smith
Julie Sweet, Accenture’s chief executive for North America, and Chad Sweet
Sarah Coulson, Mount Vernon regent, and Douglas Bradburn, Mount Vernon president
Meghan Duggan, captain of the United States Olympic ice hockey team
Stuart Holliday, former American ambassador at the United Nations, and Gwen Holliday
Henry Kissinger, former secretary of state, and Nancy Kissinger
Ronald S. Lauder, president of the World Jewish Congress and former American ambassador to Austria, and Jo Carole Lauder
Ronna McDaniel, chairwoman of the Republican National Committee, and Patrick McDaniel
Mary Morton, curator of French painting at the National Gallery of Art, and Keith Forman
John Shuster, American Olympic gold medalist in curling
Annette Simmons, Texas-based philanthropist, and Gerald Fronterhouse
Dr. Benedict Wolf and Ursula Wolf
Laurence des Cars, director of the Musée d’Orsay
Laurence Engel, president of the National Library of France
Emmanuel Perrotin, French art dealer and owner of Galerie Emmanuel Perrotin
Thomas Pesquet, a French astronaut
Hervé Pierre, French-American fashion and costume designer
Guy Savoy, French chef
Philippe Besson
Hugo Verges
Christophe Pierre, apostolic nuncio, or Vatican ambassador, to the United States
Christine Lagarde, managing director of the International Monetary Fund
