Sessions Won’t Say Whether He Recused Himself in Michael Cohen Inquiry
WASHINGTON — Attorney General Jeff Sessions evaded lawmakers’ questions on Wednesday about whether his longstanding recusal from campaign-related investigations extended to the Justice Department inquiry into President Trump’s personal lawyer, saying only that he would not confirm the existence of the investigation itself.
“I should not answer that question,” he said in testimony before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee, citing departmental rules about refraining from publicly discussing ongoing inquiries. “It would be inappropriate.”
The wide-ranging corruption investigation into the lawyer, Michael D. Cohen, has further strained the ties between the president and his top Justice Department officials. Their relationship has been fraught since Mr. Sessions recused himself last year from oversight of all campaign-related investigations, including the examination of Russia’s election interference and possible ties to Trump associates.
The topic of recusal is particularly sensitive for Mr. Sessions, once a close ally of Mr. Trump and one of his earliest political supporters. By refusing to answer lawmakers’ questions about the Cohen investigation, Mr. Sessions avoided further wrath from Mr. Trump if he were to conclude that his attorney general had stepped back from an inquiry that the president is said to view as a greater threat than the special counsel investigation into Russian meddling.
Mr. Sessions also demurred when asked whether he would quit if the president or his allies fired Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, who oversees the special counsel investigation.
“The question calls for speculation,” Mr. Sessions said. “I am not able to do that.”
In stepping aside, Mr. Sessions cited his support for Mr. Trump during the presidential race as a potential conflict and said he was following Justice Department guidelines. But the president, who has said he viewed Mr. Sessions as a protector in his role as attorney general, has chafed about it since. The recusal helped lead to the appointment of the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.
Mr. Sessions’s rare appearance on Capitol Hill came at a fraught time for the Justice Department’s top officials. After F.B.I. agents raided the office, home and hotel room of Mr. Cohen this month, the president and his allies in Congress ramped up their attacks on the department and its leaders.
Mr. Trump expressed regret that he chose Mr. Sessions as his attorney general, saying Mr. Sessions made “a very terrible mistake” in recusing himself. And House Republican leaders allied with Mr. Trump began making more onerous demands of Mr. Rosenstein for new versions of documents related to ongoing investigations, a move Democrats said was aimed at firing Mr. Rosenstein and undermining the Russia investigation.
When asked by Senator Patrick Leahy of Vermont, the senior Democrat on the Appropriations Committee, whether he had recused himself from the Cohen investigation, Mr. Sessions said it was against Justice Department policy to discuss the matter because he could inadvertently “reveal the existence, scope or breadth or nature of a matter that would be inappropriate.”
Mr. Leahy, who also wrote to Mr. Sessions last week asking about his involvement in the inquiry, pointed out that the attorney general had originally told Congress he would recuse himself “from any existing or future investigations of any matters related in any way to the campaigns for president.”
“I am honoring the recusal in every case and every matter that comes before the Department of Justice,” Mr. Sessions replied.
Justice Department policy also calls for officials who have a political relationship with the president to recuse themselves from matters that the president has taken a special interest in, Mr. Leahy noted. Mr. Trump has filed a request in federal court in Manhattan to intervene in Mr. Cohen’s case.
Mr. Sessions said he had sought advice on the Cohen investigation but had not met with the department’s top ethics official to discuss it. “But I can assure you I have not violated my recusal,” he said.
Mr. Sessions said he would recuse himself if a connection were made between the Cohen and Russia investigations. But he declined to say whether he had discussed his involvement in the Cohen case with anyone outside the Justice Department, including the president, or whether Mr. Trump or any other administration official had discussed pardoning Mr. Cohen.
Conversations with the White House “are the kind of communications that should not be revealed,” Mr. Sessions said. “I believe I have the right and the responsibility to maintain confidence in those. So I just am not able to go down that road.”
Mr. Sessions has appeared before Congress only a handful of times since his confirmation hearing in January 2017, and lawmakers on the subcommittee pressed him on a range of other topics including the opioid crisis, immigration and medical marijuana.
Perhaps in a nod to the rancorous political environment, Mr. Sessions deferred to the president in his remarks. He called the fight against the opioid epidemic “the president’s goal.” He cited Mr. Trump as a leader in the government’s efforts to combat crime, saying that the president and federal and local law enforcement leaders “are determined this crime rise will not continue.”
