Fake News Crosses the Rio Grande
MEXICO CITY — Have you heard the “news”? The Mexican presidential hopeful Ricardo Anaya wants to help the United States build a wall on the Rio Grande. And the campaign of his leftist rival Andrés Manuel López Obrador is being organized out of authoritarian Venezuela. Meanwhile, Mexico’s first lady, Angélica Rivera, has called Mr. López Obrador a “pobreton,” or pauper.
All of those stories are totally false.
They were summarized in a roundup of fake news stories by Mexico’s leading legitimate news network, Televisa. They represent just a sample of the mountain of false stories circulating on Facebook, YouTube, Twitter and WhatsApp in advance of Mexico’s presidential election on July 1.
This flurry of misinformation illustrates the ways in which, in the age of social media, fake news has become a global problem that can affect any political election in any country on the planet.
Even this newspaper got pulled into the fake news of the Mexican election. A Facebook page showed a poll claiming to have been conducted by The Times putting José Antonio Meade of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party in first place. In reality, there had been no such poll. (A Bloomberg poll tracker puts Mr. Meade in third.)
So far, it is hard to discern whether the sea of misinformation is having a significant impact on the Mexican race — or whether dark forces have aligned to support a particular candidate, as they appeared to in the United States presidential election. The fake news could be coming from several angles.
Mr. López Obrador leads by a chasm of over 18 percentage points, according to the Bloomberg tracker. That is despite his being on the end of his share of fake smears, including one that he would seize second homes and another that his son secretly drives a Lamborghini. Mother Jones identified four “sketchy” websites — three of them designed to look like traditional news websites — that appeared to be mounting coordinated attacks on Mr. López Obrador, 64, a former mayor of Mexico City.
Firmly in second place is Mr. Anaya, 39, of the conservative National Action Party. The fake news defaming him includes a photo doctored to make it appear that he is shirtless and arm in arm with a scantily clad dancer at a carnival.
Whatever the impact on polls, the spread of lies stains public debate and causes stress and confusion. A recent false message circulating on the messaging service WhatsApp said public health clinics had run out of medicine. Another fake story claimed that certain people won’t be allowed to vote, so they shouldn’t bother turning out.
Dubious players from the United States election have also reared their heads here. In a report by  Channel 4 News in Britain, Cambridge Analytica executives boasted of working in Mexico. Mr. López Obrador and Mr. Anaya have called for an inquiry into which politicians may have hired the company — but none have owned up yet.
In December, President Trump’s national security adviser, H. R. McMaster, said that Russia was trying to meddle in the Mexican election to stir up trouble on the southern border. Mr. López Obrador responded with a jokey video in which he said that he was waiting for a Russian submarine full of gold and that he now goes by Andrés Manuelovich.
An admirable attempt to combat fake news has come from a group called Verificado 2018, which investigates whether reports are false. Members rightly point out that it is important to stop politicians using the specter of fake news to attack genuine investigations into their corruption. Other organizations have also done valuable work on the issue: The Public Opinion Center of Mexico’s Universidad del Valle has a series of studies on the immense impact of social media on Mexican society.
“These efforts are doing a good job of showing people what is fake and what is real, which gives some hope,” said the journalist Esteban Illades, author of a book about the spread of fake news. “But we also need to educate people about news and the media from a young age. We need to undertake a major social effort.”
The spread of fake news comes as Mexico is still struggling to recover from its authoritarian past and the propaganda associated with it. The Institutional Revolutionary Party held the presidency for most of the 20th century, paying off journalists to report in their favor. At the same time, there is a history of devastating crimes that haven’t been satisfactorily solved, fueling conspiracy theories.
A result is distrust in the government and the news media, while many Mexicans choose to believe what their emotions tell them. In such conditions, it is less that Mexico is entering a post-truth era as it is staying stuck in one. Fake news is yet another obstacle in the way of the many here who are struggling to build an honest and open society.
